Project Gutenberg's The Noble Rogue, by Baroness Emmuska Orczy Orczy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Noble Rogue

Author: Baroness Emmuska Orczy Orczy

Release Date: September 7, 2019 [EBook #60253]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NOBLE ROGUE ***




Produced by Carlos Colon, the Harvard University and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)










  Transcriber's Notes:

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by
  =equal signs=.

  Small uppercase have been replaced with regular uppercase.

  Blank pages have been eliminated.

  Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been left as in the
  original.




BY BARONESS ORCZY


"UNTO CAESAR"

EL DORADO

THE HEART OF A WOMAN

MEADOWSWEET

THE NOBLE ROGUE

PETTICOAT RULE


GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY

NEW YORK




                           THE POCKET BOOKS


                            THE NOBLE ROGUE


                          _By_ BARONESS ORCZY

                  Author of "The Scarlet Pimpernel,"
                  "The Noble Rogue," "Petticoat Rule"


                        GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY
                               NEW YORK


                           Copyright, 1912,
                      By George H. Doran Company




                            THE NOBLE ROGUE




                                PART I




                               CHAPTER I


                 This act is an ancient tale new told.
                                                  --SHAKESPEARE.


M. Legros, tailor-in-chief to His Majesty Louis XIV and to the Court
of Paris and Versailles, bowed himself out of the room; with back bent
nearly double, and knees trembling in the effort, he receded towards
the door even whilst Monseigneur the Archbishop spoke a final and
encouraging benediction.

"Have no fear, my good Monsieur Legros," pronounced Monseigneur with
urbane kindness; "your affairs shall come under the special notice of
the Holy Father. Be of good cheer, right and justice are on your side.
Solemn vows cannot be flouted even in these days of godlessness. Go in
peace, my son; you are dismissed."

"And if the Holy Father--hem--I mean if Monseigneur would take
cognizance of the fact--hem--that I will place--" stammered M. Legros
with some confusion. "I mean, Monseigneur--that is--I am a man of
substance--and if the sum of fifty thousand francs--or--or a hundred
thousand--"

"Nay, my son, what would you suggest?" quoth Monseigneur with a slight
lifting of elegantly-arched brows. "The thought of money doth not enter
into the decrees of the Holy Father."

"I know--I know, Monseigneur," said M. Legros with ever-growing
confusion. "I only thought--"

"An you thought, my son, of pleasing God by the bestowal of alms in
these days of licentiousness and of evil luxury, then by all means
do so in accordance with your substance--I will see to the proper
distribution of those alms, good Master Legros--the two hundred
thousand francs you speak of shall be worthily bestowed, our promise
thereon."

M. Legros did not think of protesting. The sum mentioned by Monseigneur
was a heavy one in these days, when the working and trading classes
had but little left for their own pleasures once the tax collector had
passed their way. But the worthy tailor had made no idle boast when he
said that he was a man of substance; he was well able to pay a goodly
sum for the gratification of his most cherished desire.

He received his final congé almost on his knees, then he disappeared
through the doorway. Lacqueys to the right of him, lacqueys to the
left of him, lacqueys all the way along the carpeted stairs down to
the massive front door, formed a living avenue through which M. Legros
now passed with his back not yet fully straightened out after its many
humble curvatures.

Soon he reached the narrow, ill-ventilated street on which gave the
great gates of Monseigneur the Archbishop's palace. Instinctively M.
Legros gave a deep sigh of content and relief, inhaling the fresh
autumnal air which could not altogether be excluded even from these
close purlieus where roof almost met roof overhead, and evil-smelling
gutters overflowed along the roughly-constructed pavements.

The good master tailor had succeeded passing well in his momentous
errand. Monseigneur had been overgracious, and two hundred thousand
francs was after all only a small sum to come out of Rose Marie's ample
marriage portion. M. Legros now walked with a brisk step along the
right bank of the Seine, then crossing the Pont Neuf he found himself
near the Châtelet prison, and thence by narrow by-paths at his own
front door in the Rue de l'Ancienne Comédie.

Here he gave a sharp rap with the polished brass knocker, and within
a very few seconds the door was opened and an anxious feminine voice
hailed him from out the darkness of the narrow passage.

"Eh bien?--Monseigneur?--What did he say?"

M. Legros closed the door behind him with great deliberation, then he
turned, stretched out both arms and, catching the speaker round the
shoulders, imprinted two well-sounding kisses on a pair of fresh young
cheeks.

"He says," said the worthy bonhomme gaily, "that Rose Marie, the
fairest maid in France, shall be called Countess of Stowmaries before
the year is out, for right and justice and indissoluble marriage vows
are all on her side."

A little gasp--which sounded almost like a hysterical sob--broke from
the woman's throat. It seemed as if the news--evidently very anxiously
expected--was overwhelmingly good. There was silence in the little
passage for a moment, then the fresh voice, now quite cheerful and
steady, said lightly:

"Let us go and tell maman!"

Together father and daughter went up the steep, slightly-winding stair
which led to an upper story. Rose Marie, silent once more, felt as if
her young heart would presently burst through her corselet, so rapidly
did it beat with excitement and anticipation.

She followed her father into the large, cheerful-looking room which
gave on the first landing. Here a bright fire blazed in an open hearth;
blue cotton curtains hung on each side of the single, narrow window,
through which the last rays of this October day struggled faintly.

A large iron stewpot, from which escaped a jet of savoury-smelling
steam, stood invitingly upon the hob, and beside the hearth, wooden
spoon in hand, her ample proportions carefully draped in a thick
brown linen apron, stood Mme. Legros herself, the wife of one of the
wealthiest men in the whole of Paris.

"Eh bien! Legros, 'tis good news then?" she asked with cheerful
optimism, whilst a benevolent smile shone all over her round face, red
as an Eydam cheese and quite as shiny and greasy, for Madame had been
cooking and she was mightily hot.

"The best, Maman," came in hilarious accents from her husband; "our
daughter shall be installed in her English castle before many moons are
over. The Holy Father himself will interfere, and this--this--milor
Stowmaries will have to obey at once--failing which 'twill be
excommunication and nothing less than that."

M. Legros had thrown himself into the tall-backed chair, black with age
and the smoke from many a previous stewpot, and had stretched out his
legs before him, in order that his dutiful daughter Rose Marie might
the more easily divest him of his high out-door boots.

Kneeling before her father, she performed this little service for
him with all the grace of loving girlhood, and he cocked his cropped
head on one side and looked down at her with eyes in which merriment
struggled with happy tears.

She was so good to look at as she knelt thus on one knee, her fair
hair--touched with the gold of the sun of her native Provence--falling
in thick ringlets round her young face. She was so girlish and so pure,
fresh as the hawthorn in May, and withal luscious to behold like a
ripening fruit in June.

"Nay! nay!" said M. Legros with mock gravity, as he put his now
stockinged feet to the ground and rose with a great show of ceremony;
"this is no place for Madame la Comtesse of Stowmaries. She must not
kneel at any man's feet, not even at those of her fond old father. Come
to my arms, my girl," he added, once more resuming his seat, his voice
breaking in the vain endeavour to seem flippant; "sit here on my knee.
Maman, for the Lord's sake put down that spoon, and sit down like a
Christian and I'll tell you both all that Monseigneur said to me."

With a happy little sigh Rose Marie jumped to her feet. Obviously
her young heart was still too full for speech. She had said nothing,
practically, since her first greeting to her father, since she had
heard from him the good news--the confirmation of her hopes.

Her cheeks were glowing until they quite ached with the throbbing of
the veins beneath the delicate skin, and the palms of her hands felt
cold and damp with suppressed nervousness and excitement.

Obedient to her father's call, she came close to him and perched
herself on his knee, whilst his arm sought her slender waist and clung
to it with all the gentle firmness born of his fond paternal love, of
his pride in the beauty and grace of his child.

Mme. Legros--somewhat reluctantly--had pulled the stewpot further
away from the fire, and put her wooden spoon aside. Then she sat down
opposite her lord and her daughter and said blandly:

"I am listening."

"Monseigneur was most affable," now began M. Legros, speaking with some
pride at the recollection of his late reception in the Archbishop's
palace, "but from the first he bade me to be brief, so as I had
rehearsed the whole scene in my mind over and over again, and knew
exactly what I wished to say to His Greatness, I was able to put our
case before him in the most direct, most straightforward way possible.
Now if you will listen very attentively and not interrupt me I will
tell you word for word just what passed between Monseigneur and myself."

"Go on, Armand," said Madame; "I am burning with impatience and I'll
promise not to interrupt."

As for Rose Marie, she said nothing, but from the expression in her
eyes, it was obvious that she would listen attentively.

"Monseigneur sat at his desk and he was pleased to tell me to be
seated. Then he said: 'Commence, my son; I am all attention.' He fixed
his eyes upon me and I then began my narrative. 'My wife had a distant
relative,' I said, 'married to an officer in the army of the English
king. At a time of great pecuniary distress this fashionable lady
bethought herself of her connection with the humble tailor of Paris and
wrote to him an amiable letter suggesting a visit to his modest home.'
That was so, was it not, Maman?" he asked, turning for confirmation to
his buxom wife.

"Exactly so, Armand," she replied in assent; "except that the
fashionable lady was at pains not to tell us that her husband was
in prison for debt over in England and that she herself was almost
destitute--and to think that I was such a simpleton as not to guess at
the truth when she arrived with her little boy, and he with his shoes
all in holes and--"

"Easy--easy, Mélanie," rejoined M. Legros tartly. "Am I telling you my
adventures of this afternoon, or am I not?"

"But of a truth thou art telling us, Armand," replied fat Mme. Legros
blandly.

"Then I pray you to remember that I said I would not be interrupted,
else I shall lose the thread of my narration."

"But thou didst ask me a question, Armand, and I did answer."

"Then do not answer at such lengths, Mélanie," quoth the tailor
sententiously, "or I shall be an hour getting through my tale, and that
savoury stew yonder will be completely spoilt."

Harmony being thus restored under threat of so terrible a contingency,
M. Legros now resumed his narrative.

"I did tell Monseigneur," he said with reproachful emphasis, "that
at the time that Mistress Angélique Kestyon came on a visit to us in
company with her small son, then aged six and a half years, but without
nurse, serving or tiring woman of any kind, we were quite unaware of
the distressful position in which she was, and in which she had left
her lord and master over in England. I then explained to Monseigneur
how Mistress Kestyon seemed over-pleased with the grace and beauty
of our own child Rose Marie, who had just passed through her first
birthday. She would insist on calling the wench Rosemary, pronouncing
the name in an outlandish fashion, and saying that in England it stood
for remembrance. A pretty conceit enough, seeing that our Rose Marie
once seen would surely never be forgotten."

And a vigorous pressure on Rose Marie's waist brought an additional
glow to the girl's bright eyes.

"At this point," continued M. Legros, "it pleased Monseigneur to show
such marked interest in my story, that he appeared quite impatient
and said with a show of irritation--which could but be flattering to
me:--'Yes! yes! my son, but there is no need to give me all these
trifling details. I understand that you are rich, are of somewhat
humble calling, and have a daughter, and that the English lady was
poor, if high-born, and had a son. Ergo! the children were betrothed.'
Which, methinks showed vast penetration on the part of Monseigneur,"
added the worthy bonhomme naïvely, "and gracious interest in my
affairs. Whereupon, warming to my narrative, I exclaimed: 'Not only
betrothed, Monseigneur, but married with the full rites and ceremonials
of our Holy Church as by law prescribed. My wife and I--so please
Your Greatness--thought of the child's future. It has pleased God to
bless my work and to endow me with vast wealth which in the course of
time will all pass to our Rose Marie. But here in France, the great
gentlemen would always look askance at the daughter of the man who made
their coats and breeches; not so in England where trade, they say, is
held in high esteem, and in order that our child should one day be as
great a lady as any one in the land and as noble as she is beautiful,
we wedded her to a high and mighty well-born English gentleman, who
was own great nephew to one of the most illustrious noblemen in that
fog-ridden country--the Earl of Stowmaries, so he is called over there,
Monseigneur!' and you may be sure," continued M. Legros, "that I
mentioned this fact with no small measure of pride."

"Well, and what did His Greatness say to that?" queried Mme. Legros,
who would not curb her impatience, even for those few seconds whilst
her man paused in order to take breath.

"Monseigneur did not seem over-pleased at seeing me display quite so
much pride in empty titles and meaningless earthly dignities," rejoined
M. Legros lightly. "His Greatness was pleased to rebuke me and to
inform me that he himself was well acquainted with the distinguished
English family who bears the name of Kestyon of Stowmaries. The
Kestyons are all good Catholics and Monseigneur thought that this fact
was of far greater importance than their worldly honours and their
ancient lineage, and should have weighed much more heavily with us,
Maman, when we chose a husband for our daughter."

"We should not have given Rose Marie to a Protestant, Armand; you
should have told that to Monseigneur. No, not if he had been the King
of England himself," retorted Mme. Legros indignantly.

"The King of England is as good a Catholic as any of us, so 'tis
said," commented M. Legros, "but this is a digression, and I pray
you, Mélanie, not to interrupt me again. I felt that His Greatness
had lapsed into a somewhat irritable mood against me, which no
doubt I fully deserved, more especially as Monseigneur did not then
know--but 'tis I am digressing now," resumed the good man after a
slight hesitation. "In less time than I can repeat it all, I had
told Monseigneur how directly after the marriage ceremony had been
performed, we found out how grossly we had been deceived, that le
Capitaine Kestyon, the husband of Mistress Angélique, had been in a
debtor's prison in London all the time that his wife was bragging to us
about his high position and his aristocratic connections; we heard that
the great Earl of Stowmaries not only refused to have anything to do
with his nephew, who was a noted rogue and evil-doer, but that he had a
son and three grandsons of his own, so that there were a goodly number
of direct inheritors to his great title and vast estates. All this and
more we heard after our darling child had been indissolubly tied to
the son of the best-known scoundrel in the whole of England, and who
moreover was penniless, deeply in debt, and spent the next ten years in
extracting our hard-earned money from out our pockets."

The recollection of those same ten years seemed to have even now a
terrible effect on the temper of M. Legros. Indignation at the memories
his own last words evoked seemed momentarily to choke him. He pulled
a voluminous and highly-coloured handkerchief from the pocket of his
surcoat and moped his perspiring forehead, for choler had made him warm.

Mme. Legros--equally indignant in retrospect but impatient to hear
Monseigneur's final pronouncement on the great subject--was nervously
rapping a devil's tattoo on the table. Rose Marie's fair head had
fallen forward on her breast. She had said nothing all along, but
sat on her father's knee, listening with all her ears, for was not
he talking about the people who would be her people henceforth, the
land which would be her land, the man who of a truth was her lord and
husband? But when Legros, with just indignation, recalled the deceits,
the shifts, the mean, mercenary actions of those whose name she would
bear through life, then the blush of excitement seemed to turn into
one of shame, and two heavy tears fell from her eyes onto her tightly
clasped hands.

"Father, Father!" cried fat Mme. Legros in horror, "cannot you see that
you have made the child cry?"

"Then heaven punish me for a blundering ass," exclaimed Legros, with
renewed cheerfulness. "Nay! nay! my little cabbage, there's naught
to cry for now; have I not said that all is well? Those ten years
are past and done with and eight more lie on the top of them--and
if Monseigneur showed some impatience both at my pride and at my
subsequent indignation, he was vastly interested, I can tell you that,
when he heard that the son and three grandsons of the great English
nobleman were by the will of God wrecked while pleasure-cruising
together off the coast of Spain and all four of them drowned, and that
the old lord himself did not long survive the terrible catastrophe,
which had swept four direct inheritors of his vast wealth and ancient
name off the face of the earth and into the sea. His Greatness
became quite excited--and vastly amiable to me: 'Ah!' he said, 'then
surely--you cannot mean--?' You see Monseigneur was so interested he
scarce could find his words. 'Yes, so please Your Greatness,' quoth
I with becoming dignity, 'the husband of our Rose Marie, the son of
the capitaine who in life had been nought but a rogue, has inherited
the title and the wealth of his great-uncle. He is now styled by the
English the Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, Baron of Edbrooke and of
Saumaresque, and he has many other titles besides, and one of the
richest men in the whole of England!' 'Mais, comment donc!' exclaims
Monseigneur, most affably, and you'll both believe me, an you will,
but I give you my word that His Greatness took my hand and shook it,
so pleased did he seem with what I had told him. 'We must see the
lovely Comtesse of Stowmaries!--Eighteen years ago, did you say, my
son? and she was a baby then! The decrees of God are marvellous, of
a truth!--And your Rose Marie a great English lady now, eh?--with a
quantity of money and a great love for the Church!--By the Mass, my
son, we must arrange for a solemn Te Deum to be sung at St. Etienne,
before the beautiful comtesse leaves the sunny shores of France for
her fog-wrapped home across the sea!' Nay! but His Greatness said much
more than that. He spoke of the various forms which our thank-offering
might take, the donations which would be most acceptable to God on this
occasion; he mentioned the amount of money which would most adequately
express the full meed of our gratitude to Providence, by being given
to the Church, and I most solemnly assure you that he simply laughed
at the very thought of the Earl of Stowmaries contemplating the
non-fulfilment of his marriage vows. I pointed out to His Greatness
that the young man seemed inclined to repudiate the sacred bond. We
had not seen him since the ceremony eighteen years ago, and after our
final refusal to further help his parents with money or substance, we
had even ceased to correspond. His parents had gone to live in some
far, very far-off land across the ocean, where I believe cannibals and
such like folk do dwell. They had taken the boy with them, of course.
We thought the young man dead, or if alive then as great a rogue as his
father, and mourned that our only child was either a girl-widow, or
the wife of a reprobate. ''Tis eighteen years,' I said, 'since those
marriage vows were spoken.' 'Were they fifty,' retorted His Greatness,
'they would still be sacred. The Catholic Church would scorn to tie a
tie which caprice of man could tear asunder. Nay! nay!' he added with
sublime eloquence, 'have no fear on this matter, my son. Unless the
Earl of Stowmaries chooses to abjure the faith of his fathers, and
thereby cause his own eternal damnation, he cannot undo the knot which
by the will of his parents--he being a minor at the time--tied him
indissolubly to your daughter.' Thus spoke His Greatness, Monseigneur
the Archbishop of Paris," concluded M. Legros, with becoming solemnity,
"and in such words will the message be conveyed to the man who by all
laws human and divine is the husband of Rose Marie Dieudonnée Legros,
our only and dearly loved child."

There was silence in the small room now. The fast-gathering twilight
had gradually softened all sharp outlines, covering every nook and
cranny with a mantle of gloom and leaving the dying embers of the fire
to throw a warm glow over the group of these homely folk: fat Mme.
Legros in cooking apron of coarse linen, her round, moist face pale
with excitement, the sleeves of her worsted gown rolled back over her
shapely arms; the kindly tailor with rubicund face gleaming with pride
and paternal love, one arm still encircling the cherished daughter
whose future had been mapped out by him on such glorious lines, and
she, the girl--a mere child, fair and slender, with great, innocent
eyes which mirrored the pure, naïve soul within, eyes which still
looked the outer world boldly in the face, which had learned neither
to shrink in terror, nor yet to waver in deceit, a child with rosy,
moist lips which had not yet tasted the sweet and bitter savour of a
passionate kiss.

The silence became almost oppressive, for Mme. Legros dared not speak
again, lest she irritate the mightily clever man whom God had pleased
to give her as husband, and Rose Marie was silent because, unknown even
to herself, in the far-off land of Shadows, the Fates who sit and spin
the threads of life had taken in their grim and relentless hands the
first ravellings of her own.

Vaguely now, for her ears were buzzing, she heard her father speak
again, talking of Monseigneur's graciousness, of the intervention of
the French ambassador at the Court of the King of England, of an appeal
to the Holy Father who would command that the great English milor
shall acknowledge as his sole and lawful wife, Rose Marie Legros, the
daughter of the Court tailor of Paris.

It was so strange--almost uncanny, this intervention of great and
clever gentlemen, of Monseigneur the Archbishop of Paris, whom hitherto
she had only seen at a great distance passing through the streets in
his glass coach or celebrating High Mass at the great altar in Notre
Dame, of the King of England, whom she had once seen at a pageant in
Versailles, actually talking to young King Louis himself, the greatest
man in the whole world and most wonderful of all, of the Holy Father,
second only on earth to le bon Dieu Himself--all, all of these great
and marvellous people troubling about her, Rose Marie.

For the moment she could not bear to think of it all, and she supposed
that she must outwardly have looked as strange as she felt herself to
be from within, for maman suggested that the child was overwrought and
must go to her room, where presently she should partake of fricassée of
chicken and a glass of good red wine with a little clove and cinnamon
in it, the panacea, in good Mme. Legros' estimation, for every ailment
of body, mind or heart.




                              CHAPTER II

          True hope is swift, and flies with swallows' wings;
          Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
                                            --RICHARD III. V. 2.


Rose Marie hardly knew how she reached the tiny room up under the
sloping roof, which room was her very own.

She only realised that she longed to be alone to think matters out all
by herself, and then to indulge in a long and happy cry.

Oh, yes! she was quite, quite sure that she was very happy, and that it
was because of this great happiness which filled her heart to bursting,
that she felt so very much inclined to cry.

Presently maman came in with the red wine and the fricassée and was
horrified to find the child in tears.

"My pigeon, my little cabbage, but what ails thee, my jewel?"
ejaculated the good old soul, as she hastily put down the platter and
bottle which she was carrying and went to kneel beside the narrow bed
in the wall, from the depths of which came ominous sounds of a girl
sobbing.

"Nothing, Maman, nothing!" said Rose Marie, smiling at her mother's
anxiety and hastily endeavouring to dry her tears.

"Nothing--nothing--" grumbled Mme. Legros, "one does not cry for
nothing, my child--"

"And I am vastly silly, Maman, for doing it--but I assure you that it
is nothing--and--and--"

The young voice broke in renewed sobs, and two arms were stretched
forth from out the bed and sought the mother's kindly shoulder, whereon
a strangely overburdened childish heart could sob itself out in perfect
peace.

"There! there! my little cabbage," said Mme. Legros, trying with tender
pattings of the soft fair hair to soothe this well-nigh hysterical
outburst, "of a truth, thou hast been overwrought, and it was not right
for father to speak of all this before thee. Thou didst not know that
the young English lord had endeavoured to break his marriage vows,
and that thy father and I have been working hard in order to bring
influence to bear upon the rogue. Fortunately now we have succeeded,
with the help of Monseigneur, so there is no need to cry, my cabbage,
is there?"

"No, no, Maman, it is not that," said the girl more quietly; "I cannot
quite explain to you what it is that made me cry--for I have known all
along that milor--now that he is a milor and passing rich--was anxious
to forget us humble folk, who helped his parents in their need--I
have felt the shame of that before now, and it never made me cry. But
to-day--somehow--Maman, darling," she added, sitting up quite straight
in bed and looking at her mother with enquiring eyes, whilst her fine
brow was puckered in a deep frown of thought, "somehow I feel--I cannot
quite explain how it is--I feel as if my old life was finished--quite,
quite finished--as if nothing would ever be quite the same again--my
little room here, the pink curtains, that chair over there--they do not
seem the same--not quite, quite the same--Maman, cherie, I suppose you
don't understand?"

And the great childish eyes sought anxiously the mother's face, longing
for comprehension, for the explanation of an unaccountable mystery.

"No, my pigeon, I confess I do not understand," quoth worthy Mme.
Legros drily, "for I do not see--nor would any sensible person
admit--that a great English milor just because he is thy husband--can
from all that distance, from the other side of the sea, change thy room
and thy chair, nor yet thy curtains, though the latter, I will say,
sorely need washing at the present moment," she added with sublime
irrelevance.

The girl sighed. Maman for once did not understand. Nor of a truth
did she understand herself. She had tried to explain it all but had
signally failed--had only succeeded in suggesting something which of
course was supremely silly.

"I'll tell thee how it is, Rose Marie," resumed Mme. Legros with firm
decision, "thy stomach is in a disturbed condition, and a cup of cold
camomile tea thou shalt drink to-morrow before rising. I'll see to the
making of it at once,--for it must be brewed over-night to be truly
efficacious,--and come back and give thee thy supper a little later on."

Mme. Legros struggled back to her feet, happy to have found in a
prospective cup of camomile tea a happy solution for Rose Marie's
curious mood. She took up the platter again, for the fricassée must
be kept hot, and the child must eat some supper a little later on.
The good woman's heart was filled with that cheerful optimism which
persistently seeks the good side of every eventuality and nearly
always finds it. In this case Mme. Legros failed to see that anything
but good could come out of the present position. That same wonderful
optimism of hers had not been altogether proof against the events of
the past years, when she first began to realise that the marriage
which she--more so than her husband--had planned in conjunction
with Mistress Angélique Kestyon, was destined to prove a bar to her
daughter's happiness.

In those far-off days eighteen years ago, Mme. Legros had still
fostered in her homely bosom the--since then--aborted seeds of social
ambition. Well-connected on her mother's side, with a good English
family, she had wedded the Paris tailor for pecuniary rather than
for sentimental reasons, and she had a sufficiency of sound common
sense to understand that as a tradesman's wife she could not in these
days of arbitrary class distinction aspire to remain within that same
social circle to which her connections and parentage would otherwise
have entitled her. But though the seeds of ambition lay dormant in the
homely soil of her husband's back shop, they were not then altogether
destroyed.

Mélanie de Boutillier had been well past her youth when she married
Armand Legros; when her baby girl was born, and the mother with
justifiable pride realised that the child was passing fair, those
same seeds once more began to germinate. The visit of the English
relative--high-born, well-connected and accompanied by a boy not yet
seven years of age, brought them to final perfection. What Mélanie
de Boutillier had failed to obtain, Rose Marie Legros should possess
in measureless plenty, and little Rupert Kestyon, great nephew of an
English milor, should be the one to shower the golden gifts on her.

All these schemes seemed at first so easy of accomplishment. It had
been useless afterwards to cry over undue haste; at the time it seemed
right, fitting and proper. Times then were troublous in England;
Mistress Angélique Kestyon feared the democratic spirit there. It
seems that the English were actually fighting against their king, and
that the fate of the great noblemen in the country was in consequence
somewhat uncertain; but only temporarily, of course, for King Charles
Stuart would soon overcome his enemies and duly crush the rebellious
traitors who had taken up arms against him. In the meanwhile the
children would grow up, and anon when the Court of England had resumed
its former splendour, Rupert Kestyon, the dearly-loved relative of the
powerful Earl of Stowmaries, would introduce his beautiful bride to the
charmed inner circle of English aristocracy.

It all seemed so clear--so simple--as if, of a truth, the match and its
glorious consequences had been specially designed by Providence for the
glorification and social exaltation of Rose Marie Legros. Surely no
one in those days would have thought that any blame could be attached
to the parents for hurrying on the marriage ceremony between the two
children, whose united ages fell short of a decade.

The catastrophe came afterwards when the tale of deceit and of fraud
was gradually unfolded. Then came the requests for money, the long
voyage to America, the knowledge that milor Stowmaries not only had
no love for these relatives of his, but had finally and irrevocably
refused to help them in their distress, unless they took ship for a far
distant colony and never troubled him with sight of their faces again.

Good Armand Legros, who adored his daughter, was quite broken-hearted.
Madame tried to remain hopeful against these overwhelming odds--always
thinking that--though it had certainly pleased God to try the Legros
family very severely for the moment--something would inevitably turn up
which would be for the best.

The immediate result of that unvarying optimism was that she continued
Rose Marie's education on the same lines as she had originally
intended, as if the girl-wife was indeed destined anon to grace the
Court of the King of England. The child was taught the English language
by one of the many impoverished English gentlemen who had settled in
France after the murder of their king. She learned to write and to
read, to spell and to dance. She was taught to play on the virginals
and to sing whilst playing a thorough-bass on the harpsichord. Nay! her
knowledge, so 'twas said, extended even as far as geography and the
Copernican system.

Her mother kept her apart from girls of her own age, unless these
belonged to one of those few families where learning was esteemed. She
was never allowed to forget that some day she would leave her father's
shop and be a great lady in England.

Whilst Mme. Legros and the kindly bonhomme Armand gradually drifted in
their middle age to the bourgeois manners and customs of their time
and station, they jealously fostered in their only child that sense of
elegance and refinement which mayhap she had inherited from one of her
remote ancestors, or mayhap had received as a special gift from the
fairy godmother who presided at her birth.

Mme. Legros cooked and scoured, Master Armand made surcoats and
breeches, but Rose Marie was never allowed to spoil her hands with
scrubbing, or to waste her time presiding over the stewpot. Her father
had bought her a pair of gloves; these she always wore when she went
out, and she always had stockings and leather shoes on her feet. As
the girl grew up, she gradually assimilated to herself more and more
this idea that she was to be a great lady. She never doubted her future
for a moment. Her father from sheer fondness, her mother from positive
conviction, kept the certitude alive within her.

But it became quite impossible to keep from the girl's growing
intelligence all knowledge of the Kestyon's misdeeds. The worthy
tailor who was passing rich kept but a very small house, in which the
one living room, situate just above the shop, was the family meeting
ground. Rose Marie could not be kept out of the room every time her
father and mother talked over the freshly-discovered deceits and frauds
practised by their new relations.

We must suppose that the subject thus became such a familiar one with
the child-wife from the moment when she first began to comprehend it,
that it never acquired any horror or even shame for her. Mistress
Angélique Kestyon had grossly deceived papa and maman; they were not so
rich or so grand just now as they had represented themselves to be, but
it would all come right in the end--maman at least was quite sure of
that.

If--as time went on and Rose Marie from a child became a girl--that
pleasing optimism somewhat gave way, this was no doubt due to too much
book learning. Rose Marie was very fond of books, and books we all know
have a tendency to destroy the innocent belief in the goodness of this
world. This at least was Papa Legros' opinion.

Mme. Legros spoke less and less on the subject. She hoped.

She hoped resolutely and persistently, whilst the Kestyons from distant
Virginia begged repeatedly for money. She went on hoping even whilst
urging her husband to cut off further supplies, after ten years of this
perpetual sponging. She still hoped whilst no news whatever came from
the emigrants and when the rumour reached her that young Rupert Kestyon
had died out there.

At this point, however, her optimism took a fresh turn. She hoped that
the rumour was true, and that Rose Marie was now free to wed some
other equally high-born but more reliable gentleman. She continued to
hope despite the difficulty of proving that the young man had really
died, and Monseigneur the Archbishop's refusal to grant permission for
a second marriage.

Then when the news filtered through from England as far as the back
shop in the Rue de l'Ancienne Comédie that Rupert Kestyon was not
only alive but had--by a wonderful, almost miraculous series of
events--inherited the title and estates of his deceased kinsman and was
now of a truth by the will of God and the law of his country milor of
Stowmaries, and one of the greatest gentleman in the whole of England,
Mme. Legros' optimism found its crowning glory in its justification.

That the young milor seemed disinclined to acknowledge the daughter of
the Paris tailor as his wife and that he seemed to be taking serious
steps to have the marriage annulled, were but trifling matters which
never upset Mme. Legros' equanimity.

She was quite sure that the marriage could not be annulled without
special dispensation from the Holy Father himself, and equally sure
that that dispensation would never be granted. She had perfect faith
not only in the sacred indissolubility of the marriage tie, but in the
happy future of Rose Marie.

When Monseigneur the Archbishop of Paris granted her Armand a special
audience, whereat the tailor had begged permission to lay the family
case before His Greatness, Mme. Legros never for a moment doubted the
happy issue of that interview: and when her man came home and told his
satisfactory tale, maman was in no way astonished.

Her optimism had been justified: that was all.

But what did astonish the good soul was the fact that the child--Rose
Marie--sat crying in her bed, whereas she should have been singing and
laughing all about the place.

Therefore, maman, with commendable forethought, prescribed cold
camomile tea as a remedy against what was obviously but a sharp attack
of megrims.




                              CHAPTER III

                 Come Care and Pleasure, Hope and Pain
                 And bring the fated Fairy Prince.
                                                    --TENNYSON.


And in the narrow bed built within the wall in the tiny room, wherein
a tallow candle placed on a central table threw only very feeble rays,
the girl Rose Marie lay dreaming.

She--Rose Marie--the daughter of Papa Legros--as he was uniformly
called in the neighbourhood--she was now a great lady, by the will of
God and the decree of the Holy Father himself. She would have a glass
coach like the ladies whom she had so often seen driving about in
Versailles, and sit in it, dressed in the latest fashion and holding a
fan in her hand, which would be encased in a lace mitten.

At this point in her dreams Rose Marie sat up in bed, very straight
and dignified, with her little hands folded over the cotton coverlet,
and she bent her young head to right and to left, like one saluting
a number of passers-by. A nod accompanied by an encouraging smile
indicated the greeting to a supposed friend, whilst a condescending
nod and a haughty stare suggested the presence of an acquaintance of
somewhat low degree.

Thus Rose Marie had seen the ladies behave in their coaches in
Versailles. She had seen Maria Mancini bow serenely to her admirers,
and the Queen Mother bestow the stony stare on her detractors. She
had watched, wondered and admired, but never had she tried to imitate
until now--now that her smile would be appreciated by many, her frown
be of consequence to others.

Up to now it had not mattered. Though her father was reputed to be
wealthy, he was only a tailor, who had to bow and scrape and wallow
before the great gentlemen of the Court. Aye! and had more than once
been soundly thrashed because of the misfit of a pair of Court breeches.

And Rose Marie had oft sighed for greatness, for the gilded coach and
a seat at the opera, for silken dresses, flowers, patches and rouge.
She was only a child with an acutely developed sense of sympathy for
everything that was dainty and refined, everything that smelt sweetly
and was soft and tender to the touch.

Thus she went on dreaming her dream in content, never doubting for a
moment that happiness lay closely linked with this sudden accession
to grandeur. The fact that her lawful lord and husband had shown a
desire to break his marriage vows, and to take unto himself some other
wife more equal to him in rank and breeding than the humble tailor's
daughter, troubled Rose Marie not at all. With sublime faith in the
workings of Providence, she put her husband's reluctance to acknowledge
her down to his ignorance of herself.

He had never seen her since the day of the ceremony, eighteen years
ago. She was a baby in arms then, whilst now--

Rose Marie drew in her breath and listened. Maman was evidently not
yet coming up. All was still on this upper floor of the house. Rose
Marie put her feet to the ground and rose from her bed. She picked up
the candle from the table and tripped across the room to where--on the
whitewashed wall opposite--there hung a small gilt-framed mirror.

Into this she peeped, holding the candle well above her head. Her face
wore neither the look of vanity, nor even that of satisfaction: rather
was it a look of the closest possible scrutiny. Rose Marie turned her
head to right and left again, but not--this time--in order to enact a
private comedy, but in order to convince herself in her own mind that
her cheeks had indeed that peach-like bloom, which her overfond father
had so oft proclaimed, and that her hair was sufficiently brilliant in
colour to be called golden, and yet not too vivid to be called "roux."

We may take it that this scrutiny, which lasted nearly twenty minutes,
was of a satisfactory character, for presently, with a happy little
sigh, and heaving breast, Rose Marie tripped lightly back to her narrow
bed in the wall, and squeezed herself well within the further dark
angle, to which the flickering light of the tallow candle had no access.

This she did because she had heard maman's step on the stairs, and
because her own cheeks now were of a flaming red.




                                PART II




                              CHAPTER IV

                For what is wedlock forced but a hell.
                                             --1 HENRY VI. V. 5.


"My Lord is sad."

"Oh!--"

"My Lord is weary!"

"!!--"

A pause. Mistress Julia Peyton, you understand, was waxing impatient.
Can you wonder? She was not accustomed to moodiness on the part
of her courtiers; to a certain becoming diffidence mayhap, to
tongue-tiedness--if we may be allowed so to call it--on the part of her
young adorers fresh from their country homes, fledglings scarce free
from the gentle trammels of their mother's apron strings, to humility
in the presence of so much beauty, grace and wit as she was wont to
display when taken with the desire to please, to all that yes, yes and
a thousand times yes, the adorable Julia was fully accustomed. But to
silence on the part of the wittiest gentleman about town, to moodiness
akin to ill-humour on the part of the most gallant young rake this side
of Westminster--no! no! and a thousand times no! Mistress Julia would
have none of it.

Her daintily-shod foot beat a quick measure against the carpets, her
fingers delicately tipped with rouge played a devil's tattoo on the
polished top of the tiny marqueterie table beside her, and her small
teeth, white and even as those of a kitten, tore impatiently at her
under lip.

Still Lord Stowmaries paid no heed to these obvious signs of a coming
storm. He lolled in an armchair opposite the imperious beauty, his chin
was resting in his hand, his brow was puckered, and oh! most portentous
outward indication of troubles within! his cravat looked soiled and
crumpled, as if an angry hand had fidgeted its immaculate whiteness
away.

At last Mistress Julia found herself quite unable to control her
annoyance any longer. Granted that Lord Stowmaries was the richest,
most promising "parti" that had ever come her way; that he was young,
good-looking, owned half the county of Hertford, and one of the oldest
names in England, and that, moreover, he was of sufficiently amiable
disposition to be fashioned into a model husband by and by! granted
all that, say I! Had not all these advantages, I pray you to admit,
caused the fair Julia to hide her ill-humour for close on half an hour,
whilst the young man frowned and sighed, gave curt answers to her most
charming sallies, and had failed to notice that a filmy handkerchief,
lace-edged and delicately perfumed, had been dropped on that veriest
exact spot of the carpet which was most conveniently situated for
sinking on one knee within a few inches of the most adorable foot in
London?

But now the irascible beauty was at the end of her tether. She
rose--wrathfully kicking aside that same handkerchief which her surly
visitor had failed to notice--and took three quick steps in the
direction of the bell-pull.

"And now, my lord," she said, "I pray you to excuse me."

And she stretched out her hand in a gesture intended to express the
full measure of her wrath.

Lord Stowmaries roused himself from his unpleasant torpor.

"To excuse you, fair one?" he murmured in the tone of a man who has
just wakened from slumber, and is still unaware of what has been going
on around him whilst he slept.

"Ay, my good lord," she replied with a shrill note of sarcasm very
apparent in the voice which so many men had compared to that of a
nightingale. "I fain must tear myself away from the delights of your
delectable company--though I confess 'twere passing easy to find more
entertaining talk than yours has been this last half-hour."

"Would you be cruel to me now, Mistress?" he said with a deep and
mournful sigh, "now, when--"

"Now, when what?" she retorted still pettishly, though a little
mollified by his obvious distress.

She turned back towards him, and presently placed a hand on his
shoulder.

"My lord," she said resolutely, "either you tell me now and at once
what ails you this afternoon, or I pray you leave me, for in your
present mood, by my faith, your room were more enjoyable than your
company."

He took that pretty hand which still lingered on his shoulder, and
pressing it for a few lingering seconds between both his, he finally
conveyed its perfumed whiteness to his lips.

"Don't send me away," he pleaded pathetically; "I am the most miserable
of mortals, and if you closed your doors against me now, you would be
sending your most faithful adorer straight to perdition."

"Tut, man!" she rejoined impatiently, "you talk like a gaby. In the
name of Heaven, tell me what ails you, or I vow you'll send me into my
grave with choler."

"I have been trying to tell you, Mistress, this past half-hour."

"Well?"

"But Lud help me, I cannot."

"Then it's about a woman," she concluded with firm decision.

He gave no reply. The conclusion was obvious.

The fair Julia frowned. This was threatening to become serious. It was
no mere question of moodiness then, of ill-humour anon to be forgiven
and dissipated with a smile.

There was a woman at the bottom of my lord Stowmaries' ill-humour. A
woman who had the power to obtrude her personality between his mental
vision and the daintiest apparition that had ever turned a man's brain
dizzy with delight. A woman in fact who might prove to be an obstacle
to the realisation of Mistress Julia Peyton's most cherished dreams.

All thoughts of anger, of petulance, of bell-pulls and peremptory
congés fled from the beauty's mind. She sat down again opposite the
young man; she rested her elbows on her knees, her chin in her hands;
she looked serious, sympathetic, interested, anything you like. A
sufficiency of moisture rose to her eyes to render them soft and
lustrous, appealing and irresistible. Her lips parted and quivered just
sufficiently to express deep emotion held courageously in check, whilst
from beneath the little lace cap one or two rebellious curls free from
powder, golden in colour, and silky in texture, were unaccountably
allowed to escape.

Thus equipped for the coming struggle, she repeated her question,
not peremptorily this time, but gently and in a voice that trembled
slightly with the intensity of sympathy.

"What ails my lord?"

"Nothing short of despair," he replied, whilst his eyes rested with a
kind of mournful abnegation on the enchanting picture so tantalisingly
near to him.

"Is it quite hopeless, then?" she asked.

"Quite."

"An entanglement?"

"No. A marriage."

Outwardly she made no sign. Mistress Julia was not one of those
simpering women who faint, or scream, or gasp at moments of mental
or moral crises. I will grant you that the colour left her cheek,
and that her fingers for one brief instant were tightly clutched--no
longer gracefully interlaced--under her chin. But this was in order to
suppress emotion, not to make a show of it.

There was only a very momentary pause, the while she now, with
deliberate carelessness, brushed a rebellious curl back into its place.

"A marriage, my good lord," she said lightly; "nay! you must be
jesting--or else mayhap I have misunderstood.--A marriage to render you
moody?--Whose marriage could that be?--"

"Mine, Mistress--my marriage," exclaimed Lord Stowmaries, now in tones
of truly tragical despair; "curse the fate that brought it about, the
parents who willed it, the necessity which forced them to it, and which
hath wrecked my life."

Mistress Julia now made no further attempt to hide her fears. Obviously
the young man was not jesting. The tone of true misery in his voice was
quite unmistakable. It was the suddenness of the blow which hurt her
so. This fall from the pinnacle of her golden dreams. For weeks and
months now she had never thought of herself in the future as other than
the Countess of Stowmaries, chatelaine of Maries Castle, the leader of
society both in London and in Newmarket, by virtue of her husband's
wealth and position, of her own beauty, tact and grace.

She had even with meticulous care so reorganised her mind and memory,
that she could now eliminate from them all recollections of the more
humble past--the home at Norwich, the yeoman father, kindly but
absorbed in the daily struggle for existence, the busy, somewhat vulgar
mother, the sordid existence peculiar to impoverished smaller gentry;
then the early marriage with Squire Peyton. It had seemed brilliant
then, for the Squire, though past his youth, had a fine house, and
quite a few serving men--but no position--he never came to London and
Mistress Julia's knowledge of Court and society was akin to that which
children possess of fairies or of sprites.

But Squire Peyton it appears had more money than he had owned to in
his lifetime. He had been something of a miser apparently, for even
his young widow was surprised when at his death--which occurred if you
remember some twenty-four months ago--she found herself possessed of
quite a pleasing fortune.

This was the beginning of Mistress Julia's golden dreams, of her
longings towards a more brilliant future, which a lucky second marriage
could easily now secure for her. The thousand pounds a year which she
possessed enabled her to take a small house in Holborn Row, and to lay
herself out to cut a passable figure in London society. Not among the
Court set, of course, but there were all the young idlers about town,
glad enough to be presented to a young and attractive widow, endowed
with some wealth of her own, and an inordinate desire to please.

The first few idlers soon attracted others, and gradually the pretty
widow's circle of acquaintances widened. If that circle was chiefly
composed of men, who shall blame the pretty widow?

It was a husband she wanted, and not female companionship. Lord
Swannes, if you remember, paid her his court, also Sir Jeremiah
Harfleet, and it was well known that my lord of Craye--like the true
poet that he was--was consumed with love of her. But as soon as
Mistress Julia realised that richly-feathered birds were only too
willing to fly into her snares, she aimed for higher game. A golden
eagle was what she wanted to bring down.

And was not the young Earl of Stowmaries the veritable prince of golden
eagles?

He came and saw and she conquered in a trice. Her beauty, which was
unquestionable, and an inexhaustible fund of _verve_ and high-spirited
chatter which easily passed for wit were attractive to most men, and
Lord Stowmaries, somewhat blasé already by the more simpering advances
of the Court damsels, found a certain freshness in this young widow who
had not yet shaken off the breezy vulgarity of her East Anglian home,
and whose artless conversation, wholly innocent of elegance, was more
amusing than the stilted "Ohs!" and "Luds!" of the high-born ladies of
his own rank.

The golden eagle seemed overwilling to allow the matrimonial snare set
by the fair Julia to close in around him: she was already over-sure of
him, and though she did not frequent the assemblies and salons where
congregated his lordship's many friends, she was fully aware that her
name was being constantly coupled with that of the Earl of Stowmaries.

But now she saw that she had missed her aim, that the glorious bird no
longer flew within her reach, but was a prisoner in some one else's
cage, fettered beyond her powers of liberation.

But still Mistress Julia with persistence worthy a better cause refused
to give up all hope.

"Tell me all about it, my lord," she said as quietly as she could. "It
had been better had you spoken before."

"I have been a fool, Mistress," he replied dully, "yet more sinned
against than sinning."

"You'll not tell me that you are actually married?" she insisted.

"Alas!"

"And did not tell me so," she retorted hotly, "but came here, courting
me, speaking of love to me--of marriage--God help you! when the very
word was a sacrilege since you were not free--Oh! the perfidy of it
all!--and you speak of being more sinned against than sinning. 'Tis the
pillory you deserve, my lord, for thus shaming a woman first and then
breaking her heart."

She was quite sincere in her vehemence, for self-control had now quite
deserted her, and the wrong and humiliation which she had been made to
endure, rose up before her like cruel monsters that mocked and jeered
at her annihilated hopes and her vanished dreams. Her voice rose in a
crescendo of shrill tones, only to sink again under the strength of
choking sobs. Despair, shame and bitter reproach rang through every
word which she uttered.

"As you rightly say, Mistress," murmured the young man, "God help me!"

"But the details, man--the details--" she rejoined impatiently; "cannot
you see that I am consumed with anxiety--the woman?--who is she?--"

"Her name is Rose Marie," he replied in the same dull, even tones,
like a schoolboy reciting a lesson which he hath learned, but does not
understand; "she is the daughter of a certain M. Legros, who is tailor
to His Majesty the King of France."

"A tailor!" she gasped, incredulous now, hopeful once more that the
young man was mayhap suffering from megrims and had seen unpleasant
visions, which had no life or reality in them.

"A tailor's daughter?" she repeated. "Impossible!"

"Only too true," he rejoined. "I had no choice in the matter."

"Who had?"

"My parents."

"Tush!" she retorted scornfully, "and you a man!"

"Nay! I was not a man then."

"Evidently."

"I was in my seventh year!" he exclaimed pathetically.

There was a slight pause, during which the swiftly-risen hope a few
moments ago once more died away. Then she said drily:

"And she?--this--this Rose or Mary--daughter of a tailor--how old was
she when you married her?"

"In her second year, I think," he replied meekly. "I just remember
quite vaguely that after the ceremony she was carried screaming and
kicking out of the church. That was the last I saw of my wife from that
day to this--"

"Bah!"

"My great-uncle, the late Lord Stowmaries, shipped my father, mother
and myself off to Virginia soon after that. My father had been
something of a wastrel all his life and a thorn in the flesh of the
old miser. The second time that he was locked up in a debtor's prison,
Lord Stowmaries paid up for him on the condition that he went off to
Virginia at once with my mother and myself, and never showed his face
in England again."

"Hm! I remember hearing something of this when you, my lord, came into
your title. But these--these--tailor people--who were they?"

"Madame Legros was a distant connection of my mother's who, I suppose,
married the tailor for the same reason that I--an unfortunate lad
without a will of my own--was made to marry the tailor's daughter."

"She is rich--of course?"

"Legros, the tailor, owns millions, I believe, and Rose Marie is his
only child. It was the first time that my poor father, Captain Kestyon,
found himself actually in prison and unable to pay his debts. The Earl
of Stowmaries--a wicked old miser, if ever there was one--refused to
come to his rescue. My mother was practically penniless then; she had
no one to whom she could turn for succour except the cousin over in
Paris, who had always been kind to her, who was passing rich, burning
with social ambition, and glad enough to have the high-born English
lady beneath her bourgeois roof."

"And that same burning social ambition caused the worthy tailor to
consent to a marriage between his baby daughter and the scion of one of
the grandest families in England," commented Mistress Julia calmly. "It
were all so simple--if only you had had the manhood to tell me all this
ere now."

"I thought that miserable marriage forever forgotten."

"Pshaw!" she retorted, "was it likely?"

"I had heard nothing of the Legros for many years," he said dejectedly.
"My father had died out in the Colony: my mother and I continued to
live there on a meagre pittance which that miserly old reprobate--my
great-uncle--grudgingly bestowed upon us. This was scarce sufficient
for our wants, let alone for enabling us to save enough money to pay
our passage home. At first my mother was in the habit of asking for
and obtaining help from the Legros!--you understand? she never would
have consented to the connection," added the young man with naïve
cynicism, "had she not intended to derive profit therefrom, so whenever
an English or a French ship touched the coast my poor mother would
contrive to send a pathetic letter to be delivered in Paris, at the
house of the king's tailor. But after a while answers to these missives
became more and more rare, soon they ceased altogether, and it is now
eight years since the last remittance came--"

"The worthy tailor and his wife were getting tired of the aristocratic
connection," commented Mistress Julia drily; "no doubt they too had
intended to derive profit therefrom and none came."

"Was I not right, Mistress, in thinking that ill-considered marriage
forgotten?" quoth Lord Stowmaries with more vehemence than he had
displayed in the actual recital of the sordid tale; "was I not
justified in thinking that the Legros had by now bitterly regretted the
union of their only child to the penniless son of a spendthrift father?
Tell me," he reiterated hotly, "was I not justified?--I thought that
they had forgotten--that they had regretted--that Rose Marie had found
a husband more fitted to her lowly station and to her upbringing--and
that her parents would only be too glad to think that I too had
forgotten--or that I was dead."

There was a slight pause. Mistress Julia's white brow was puckered into
a deep frown of thought.

"Well, my lord," she said at last, "ye've told me the past--and though
the history be not pretty, it is past and done with, and I take it that
your concern now is rather with the present."

"Alas!"

"Nay! sigh me not such doleful sighs, man!" she exclaimed with angry
impatience, "but in the name of all the saints get on with your tale.
What has happened? The Legros have found out that little Rupert Kestyon
hath now become Earl of Stowmaries and one of the richest peers in the
kingdom--that's it--is it not?"

"Briefly, that is it, Mistress. They demand that their daughter be
instated in her position and the full dignities and rights to which her
marriage entitle her."

"Failing which?" she asked curtly.

"Oh! scandal! disgrace! they will apply to the Holy Father--the orders
would then come direct from Rome--I could not disobey under pain of
excommunication--"

"Such tyranny!"

"The Kestyons have been Catholics for five hundred years," said the
young man simply, whilst a touch of dignity--the first since he began
to relate his miserable tale--now crept into his attitude. "We do not
call the dictates of the Holy Father in question, nor do we name them
tyranny. They are irrevocable in matters such as these--"

"Surely--a sum of money--" she hazarded.

"The Legros have more of that commodity than I have. But it is not a
question of money. Believe me, fair Mistress," he said in tones which
once more revealed the sorrow of his heart, "I have thought on the
matter in all its bearings--I have even broached the subject to the
Duke of York," he added after an imperceptible moment of hesitation.

"Ah? and what said His Highness?" asked Mistress Julia with that
quick inward catching of her breath which the mentioning of exalted
personages was ever wont to call forth in her.

"Oh! His Highness only spoke of the sanctity of the marriage tie--"

"'Twas not likely he would talk otherwise. 'Tis said that his bigotry
grows daily upon him--and that he only awaits a favourable moment to
embrace openly the Catholic Faith--"

"His Majesty was of the same opinion, too."

"Ah? You spoke to His Majesty?"

"Was it not my duty?"

"Mayhap--mayhap--and what did His Majesty say?"

"Oh! he was pleased to take the matter more lightly--but then there is
the Queen Mother--and--"

"Who else? I pray you, who else?" said Mistress Julia now with renewed
acerbity. "His Majesty, His Royal Highness, the Queen--half London, to
boot--to know of my discomfiture and shame--"

Her voice again broke in a sob, she buried her face in her hands, and
tears which mayhap had more affinity to anger than to sorrow escaped
freely from between her fingers. In a moment the young man was at her
feet. Gone was his apathy, his sullenness now. He was on one knee and
his two arms encircled the quivering shoulders of the fair, enraged one.

"Mistress, Mistress," he entreated, whilst his eager lips sought the
close proximity of her shell-like ear; "Julia, my beloved, in the name
of the Holy Virgin, I pray you dry your tears. You break my heart, fair
one. You--O God!" he added vehemently, "am I not the most miserable
of men? What sin have I committed that such a wretched fate should
overwhelm me? I love you and I have made you cry--"

"Nay, my lord," whispered Julia through her tears, "an you loved me--"

She paused with well-calculated artfulness, whilst he murmured with
pathetic and tender reproach:

"An I loved you! Is not my heart bound to your dainty feet? my soul
fettered by the glance of your eyes? Do you think, Mistress, that I can
ever bear to contemplate the future now, when for days, nay! weeks and
months, ever since I first beheld your exquisite loveliness, I have
ever pictured myself only as your slave, ever thought of you only as my
wife? That old castle over in Hertfordshire, once so inimical to me,
I have learnt to love it of late because I thought you would be its
mistress; I treasured every tree because your eyes would behold their
beauty; I guarded with jealous care every footpath in the park because
I hoped that some day soon your fairy feet would wander there."

Mistress Julia seemed inclined to weep yet more copiously. No doubt the
ardently-whispered words of my lord Stowmaries caused her to realise
more vividly all that she had hoped for, all that was lost to her now.

Oh! was it not maddening? Had ever woman been called upon to endure
quite so bitter a disappointment?

"It's the shame of it all, my lord," she said brokenly, "and--"
she whispered with tenderness, "I too had thought of a future
beside a man whom I had learned to--to love. I suffer as you do, my
lord--and--besides that, the awful shame. Your favours to me, my
lord, have caused much bitter gall in the hearts of the envious--my
humiliation will enable them to exult--to jeer at my discomfiture--to
throw scandalous aspersions at my conduct--I shall of a truth be
disgraced, sneered at--ruined--"

"Let any one dare--" muttered the young man fiercely.

"Nay! how will you stop them? 'Tis the women who will dare the most.
Oh! if you loved me, my lord, as you say you do, if your protestations
are not mere empty words, you would not allow this unmerited disgrace
to fall upon me thus."

Who shall say what tortuous thoughts rose in Mistress Peyton's mind
at this moment? Is there aught in the world quite so cruel as a woman
baffled? Think on it, how she had been fooled. The very intensity of
the young man's passion, which had been revealed to her in its fulness
now that he knew that an insuperable barrier stood between him and the
fulfilment of his desires, showed her but too plainly how near she had
been to her goal.

At times--ere this--she had dreaded and doubted. The brilliancy of his
position, his wealth and high dignity had caused her sometimes a pang
of fear lest he did not think her sufficiently his equal to raise her
to his own high rank. At such moments she had redoubled her efforts,
had schemed and had striven, despite the fact that her efforts in
that direction had--as she well knew--not escaped the prying eyes of
the malevolent. What cared she then for their sneers so long as she
succeeded?

And now with success fully in sight, she had failed--hopelessly,
ridiculously--ignominiously failed.

Oh! how she hated that unknown woman, that low-born bourgeoise, who had
robbed her of her prize! She hated the woman, she hated the family, the
Parisian tailor and his scheming wife. God help her, she even hated the
unfortunate young deceiver who was clinging passionately to her knees.

She pushed him roughly aside, springing to her feet, unable to sit
still, and began pacing up and down the small room, the tiny dainty
cage wherein she had hoped to complete the work of ensnaring the golden
bird.

"Julia!"

He too jumped to his feet. Once more he tried to embrace the quivering
shoulders, to imprison the nervous, restless fingers, to capture
the trembling lips. But she would no longer yield. Of what use were
yielding now?

"Nay! nay! I pray you, leave me," she said petulantly. "Of what purpose
are your protestations, my lord--they are but a further outrage.
Indeed, I pray you, go."

Once more she turned to the bell-pull, and took the heavy silken
cord in her hand, the outward sign of his dismissal. Some chivalrous
instinct in him made him loth to force his company on her any longer.
But his glowering eyes, fierce and sullen, sought to read her face.

"When may I come back?" he asked.

"Never," she replied.

But we may be allowed to suppose that something in her accent, in her
attitude of hesitancy, gave the lie to the cruel word, for he rejoined
immediately:

"To-morrow?"

"Never," she repeated.

"To-morrow?" he insisted.

"What were the use?"

"I vow," he said with grim earnestness, "that if you dismiss me now,
without the hope of seeing you again, I'll straight to the river, and
seek oblivion in death."

"'Twere the act of a coward!" she retorted.

"Mayhap. But Fate has dealt overharshly with me. I cannot face life
if you turn in bitterness from me. Heaven only knows how I can face
it at all without you--but your forgiveness may help me to live; it
would keep me back from the lasting disgrace of a suicide's grave, from
eternal damnation. Will you let me come to-morrow? Will you give me
your forgiveness then?"

He tried to draw near her again, but she put out her hand and drew
resolutely back.

"Mayhap--mayhap," she said hurriedly. "I know not--but not now, my
lord--I entreat you to go."

She rang the bell quickly, as if half afraid of herself, lest she might
yield, after all. Mistress Julia knew but little of love--perhaps until
this moment she had never realised that she cared for this young man,
quite apart from the position and wealth which he would be able to give
her. But now, somehow, she felt intensely sorry for him, and there was
quite a small measure of unselfishness in her grief at this irrevocable
turn of events. The glance which she finally turned upon him softened
the cruelty of his dismissal.

"Come and say good-bye to-morrow," she murmured. Then she raised a
finger to her lips. "Sh!--sh!--sh!" she whispered scarce above her
breath; "say nothing more now--I could not bear it. But come and say
good-bye to-morrow."

The serving man's steps were heard the other side of the door. He was
coming in answer to the bell.

Lord Stowmaries dropped on one knee. He contrived to capture
a feebly-resisting little hand and to impress a kiss upon the
rouge-tipped fingers.

Then after a final low bow, he turned and walked out of the room.




                               CHAPTER V

      There is nothing but roguery to be found in villainous man.
                                              --I HENRY IV. II. 4.


Mistress Julia Peyton waited for a few moments until the opening
and shutting of the outer door proclaimed the fact that young Lord
Stowmaries had really and definitely gone.

Then she went to the little _secrétaire_ which stood in an angle of the
room, drew forth a sheet of paper, took a heavy quill pen in her hand,
and feverishly--though very laboriously--began to write.

It was a difficult task which the fair lady had set herself to do, for
neither writing nor spelling were among her accomplishments, being
deemed unnecessary and not pertaining to the arts of pleasing. But
still she worked away, with hand cramped round the rebellious quill,
dainty fingers stained with the evil-smelling black liquid, and her
brow puckered with the intensity of mental effort, until she had
succeeded in putting on paper just what she wished to say:

  "_To siR john Ayloff at His resedence in lincoln's inn
  Filds._

  "HONORD SIR COSIN: This to Tell yo That i wish to speke with
  yo This da and At ons opon a Matter of life and Deth.

                     "yr obedt Servt
                                     "JULIA PEYTON."

A goodly number of blots appeared upon this missive as well as upon
Mistress Julia's brocaded kirtle, before she had finished. But once
the letter duly signed, she folded and sealed it, then once more rang
the bell.

"Take this to the house of Sir John Ayloffe at once," she said
peremptorily to her serving man who appeared at the door, "and if he be
within bring him hither without delay. If he be from home, seek him at
the Coffee Tavern in Holborn Bars, or at the sign of the Three Bears in
the Strand. But do not come back until you've found Sir John."

She gave the letter to the man, and, as the latter with a brief word
indicative of obedience and understanding prepared to go, she added
curtly:

"And if you do not find Sir John and bring him hither within half an
hour, you may leave my service without notice or character, but with
twenty blows of the stick across your back. You understand? Now you may
go."

Then--as the man finally retired--Mistress Julia was left alone to face
the problem as to how best she could curb her impatience until the
arrival of Sir John.

Her threat would lend wings to her messenger's feet, for her
service was reckoned a good one, owing to the many lavish gifts and
unconsidered trifles which fell from the liberal hands of Mistress
Julia's courtiers, whilst her old henchman--a burly East Anglian relict
of former days in Norfolk--loved to wield a heavy stick over the backs
of his younger subordinates.

If Sir John Ayloffe was at home, he could be here in ten minutes; if
he had gone to the Coffee Tavern in Holborn Bars, then in twenty; but
if the messenger had to push on as far as the Strand, then the full
half-hour must elapse ere the arrival of Sir John.

And if he came, what should she say to him? Of all her many adorers,
Sir John was the only one who had never spoken of matrimony. A distant
connection of the late Squire Peyton's, he it was who had launched the
young widow on her social career in London and thus enabled her to
enter on her great matrimonial venture.

Sir John Ayloffe, who in his early youth had been vastly busy in
dissipating the fortune left to him by a thrifty father, was chiefly
occupied now that he had reached middle age in finding the means to
live with outward decency, if not always with strict honesty. Among
these means gambling and betting were of course in the forefront.
These vices were not only avowable, they were thought gentlemanly and
altogether elegant.

But how to gamble and bet without cheating is a difficult problem which
Sir John Ayloffe never really succeeded in solving. So far chance had
favoured him. His various little transactions at the hazard tables or
betting rings had gone off with a certain amount of luck and not too
much publicity.

He had managed to keep up his membership at Culpeper's and other
fashionable clubs, and had not up to the present been threatened with
expulsion from Newmarket. He was still a welcome guest at the Coffee
Taverns where the young bloods congregated, and at the Three Bears in
the Strand, the resort of the most fashionable young rakes of the day.

But one or two dark, ugly-looking clouds began to hover on his
financial horizon, and there was a time--some eighteen months ago--when
Sir John Ayloffe had serious thoughts of a long voyage abroad for the
benefit of his health.

This was just before he received the intimation that his cousin--old
Squire Peyton--had left a young and pretty widow, who was burning with
the desire not to allow her many charms to be buried in oblivion in a
tumble-down Norfolk manor.

Although Mistress Julia Peyton knew little if anything of spelling and
other book lore, her knowledge of human--or rather masculine--nature
was vast and accurate. After half an hour's conversation with her
newly-found kinsman, she had gauged the use which she could make of him
and of his impecuniousness to a nicety.

He was over-ready, on the other hand, to respond to her wishes. The
bargain was quickly struck, with cards on the table, and the calling of
a spade by its own proper appellation.

Mistress Julia Peyton was calculated to do credit to any London
kinsman who chose to introduce his most aristocratic friends into her
house. And remember, Sir John Ayloffe had plenty of these, and was to
receive a goodly sum from the young widow for every such introduction.
Such matters were not difficult to arrange at a time when money was
scarce and love of display great. The fair Julia lost nothing by the
business. Her house, thanks to Sir John, was well frequented by the
pleasure-loving set of London.

Then there loomed ahead the final and great project: the marriage of
Mistress Julia! and herein Sir John's cooperation was indeed to be well
paid. From one thousand pounds, up to five, was to be his guerdon,
according as his fair kinswoman's second husband was a wealthy baronet,
a newly-created peer, or the bearer of one of those ancient names and
high dignities or titles which gave him entrées at Court, privileges of
every sort and kind, which his wife would naturally share with him.

When the brigantine _Speedwell_ went down off the Spanish coast with
all on board, the late Earl of Stowmaries lost at one fell swoop his
only son and heir, and the latter's three young boys, who were all on
a pleasure cruise on the ill-fated vessel. The old man did not survive
the terrible shock of that appalling catastrophe. He died within six
months of the memorable tragedy, and Rupert Kestyon--the son of the
impecunious spendthrift who was lying forgotten in a far-off grave in a
distant colony--became Earl of Stowmaries, one of the wealthiest peers
in England.

In a moment he became the most noted young buck of the Court of the
Restoration, the cynosure of every feminine eye. He was young, well
looking, and his romantic upbringing in the far-off colony founded by
his co-religionists, made him a vastly interesting personality.

Mistress Julia, as soon as she heard his name, his prestige, and
his history, began to dream of him--and of herself as Countess of
Stowmaries. Once more Cousin John was appealed to.

"Six thousand pounds for you, Cousin, the day on which I become
Countess of Stowmaries."

Only the introduction was needed. Mistress Julia, past-mistress by now
in the art of pleasing, would undertake to do the rest.

Young Lord Stowmaries was a member of Culpeper's. Sir John Ayloffe
contrived to attract his attention, and one day to bring him to the
house of the fascinating widow.

Sir John had done his work. So had the beautiful Julia. It was Chance
who had played an uneven game, wherein the two gamblers, handicapped by
their ignorance of past events, had lost the winning hand.

And it was because she felt that Cousin John had almost as much at
stake in the game as she had, that Mistress Julia Peyton sent for her
partner, when Chance dealt what seemed a mortal blow to her dearest
hope and scheme.




                              CHAPTER VI

    'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
    Between the pass and fell incenséd points of mighty opposites.
                                                   --HAMLET V. 2.


Less than twenty minutes after the despatch of her missive--twenty
minutes which seemed to Julia more like twenty cycles of immeasurable
time--Sir John Ayloffe was announced.

He entered very composedly. Having been formally announced by the
servant, he waited with easy patience that the man should close the
doors and leave him alone with his fair cousin.

He scarcely touched her fingers with his lips and she said quickly:

"'Twas kind to come at once. You were at home?"

"Waiting for this summons," he replied.

"Then you knew?" she asked.

"Since last evening!" he said simply.

He was of a tall, somewhat fleshy build, the face--good-looking
enough--rendered heavy by many dissipations and nights of vigil and
pleasure. His eyes were very prominent, surrounded by thick lids,
furtive and quick in expression like those of a fox on the alert.
The heavy features--nose, chin and lips--were, so 'twas said, an
inheritance from a Jewish ancestress, the daughter of a rich Levantine
merchant, brought into England by one of the Ayloffes who graced this
country in the days of Richard III.

It was the money of this same ancestress which had enriched the
impoverished family, and had at the same time sown the seeds of that
love of luxury and display which had ruined the present bearer of the
ancient name. From that same Oriental ancestress Sir John Ayloffe had
no doubt inherited his cleverness at striking a bargain as well as his
taste for showy apparel. He was always dressed in the latest fashion,
and had already adopted the new modes lately imported from France, the
long vest tied in with a gaily coloured sash, the shorter surcoat with
its rows of gilded buttons, and oh! wonder of wonders, the huge French
periwig, with its many curls which none knew better than did Sir John
how to toss and to wallow when he bowed.

His fat fingers were covered with rings, and the buckles on his shoes
glittered with shiny stones.

Julia, quivering with eagerness and excitement which she took no pains
to conceal, now dragged Sir John down to a settee beside her.

"You knew that my lord of Stowmaries was a married man, and that I have
been fooled beyond the powers of belief!" she ejaculated, whilst her
angry eyes searched his furtive ones, in a vain endeavour to read his
thoughts.

"I heard my lord's miserable story from his own lips last night,"
reiterated Sir John.

"Ah! He told it then over the supper table, between two bumpers of
wine, to a set of boon companions as drunken, as dissolute as himself?
Man! man! why don't you speak?" she cried almost hysterically, for
she had suffered a great deal to-day, her nerves were overwrought and
threatening to give way in the face of this new and horrible vision
conjured up by her own excited imagination. "Why don't you describe
the whole scene to me--the laughter which the tale evoked, the sneers
directed against the unfortunate woman who has been so hideously
fooled?"

Ayloffe listened to the tirade with the patience of a man who has had
many dealings with the gentle if somewhat highly-strung sex. He patted
her twitching fingers with his own soft, pulpy palm, and waited until
her paroxysm of weeping had calmed down, then he said quietly:

"Nay, dear coz, the scene as it occurred round the most exclusive table
at the Three Bears, in no way bears resemblance to the horrible picture
which your fevered fancy has conjured up. My lord of Stowmaries told
his pitiable tale in the midst of awed and sympathetic silence, broken
only by brief exclamations of friendship and pity."

"And my name was not mentioned?" she asked, mollified but still
incredulous.

"Not save in the deepest respect," he replied, whilst a line of sarcasm
quickly repressed rose to his fleshy lips. "How could you suppose the
reverse?"

"Ah, well, mayhap, since women were not present. But they will hear
of it, too, to-day or to-morrow. The story is bound to leak out. My
lord of Stowmaries' attentions to me were known all over the town--and
to-day or to-morrow people will talk, will laugh and jeer. Oh! I cannot
bear it," she added with renewed vehemence; "I cannot--I cannot--I
verily believe 'twill drive me mad."

She rose and resumed her agitated walk up and down the small room,
her clenched fists beating one against the other, her trembling lips
murmuring with irritating persistency.

"I cannot bear it--I cannot bear it. The ridicule--the ridicule will
kill me--"

Suddenly she paused in her restlessness, stood in front of Sir John and
let her tear-dimmed eyes rest on his thick-set face.

"Cousin," she said deliberately, "you must find a way out of this
impasse."

"You must find a way out of it," she reiterated firmly.

He shrugged his shoulders, and said drily:

"Fair Mistress, you may as well ask me to reconcile the Pope of Rome
and all the hierarchy of the Catholic Church to the idea of flouting
the sacrament of marriage, by declaring that its bonds are no longer
indissoluble. The past few centuries have taught us that in Rome they
are none too ready to do that."

"I was not thinking of such vast schemes," said Julia in tones as dry
as his had been. "I was not thinking either of corrupting the Roman
Church, or of persuading one of her adherents to rebel against her.
My lord of Stowmaries has already explained to me," she continued
with bitter sarcasm, "that against the Pope's decision there would be
no appeal--he himself would not wish to appeal against it. His love
for me is apparently not so boundless as I had fondly imagined, its
limits meseems are traced in Rome. He has given me to understand that
his wife's people--those--those tailors of Paris--actually hold a
promise from the Pope that a command will be issued ordering that their
daughter be installed and acknowledged as Countess of Stowmaries and
that without any undue delay. Failing which, excommunication for my
lord, scandal, disgrace. Bah! I know not!--these Romanists are servile
under such tyranny--and we know that not only the Duke of York, but the
king himself is at one with the Catholics just now. No--no--no--that
sort of thing is not to be thought on, Cousin, but there are other
ways--"

Her eyes, restless, searching, half-fearful, tried to fix the glance of
his own. But his shifted uneasily, now responding to her questioning
look, anon trying to avoid it, as if dreading to comprehend.

"Other ways, other ways!" he muttered; "of a truth there are many
such--but none of which you, fair Cousin, would care to take the risk."

"How do you know that?" she retorted. "There are no risks which I
would not run, in order to free the man I love from the trammels of an
undesired marriage."

Cousin John said nothing in reply. His eyes, still furtive in
expression, were no longer restless. They were fixed upon the beautiful
face before him, the luminous eyes, the daintily-curved mouth, the
rounded chin--a transparent and exquisite mask which scarcely concealed
now the strange and tortuous thoughts which chased one another behind
that white brow, smooth as that of a child.

She held his gaze, willing that he should read those thoughts, wishing
him to divine them; in fact, to save her the humiliation of framing
them into words. But as he seemed disinclined to speak, she reiterated
with slow and deliberate emphasis:

"There are no risks, Cousin, which I would not run."

"'Tis nobly said," he remarked, without attempting this time to conceal
the sarcastic smile which played round his sensuous lips. "Odd's fish!
the man whom you have honoured with such sublime devotion is lucky
beyond compare."

"A truce on your sneers, Sir John," she retorted imperiously; "you said
that there were several ways whereby that hateful marriage could be
annulled. What are they?"

Sir John Ayloffe glanced down the length of his elegant surcoat; with
careful hand he smoothed out a wrinkle which had appeared in the
well-fitting breeches just above his knee, he readjusted the set of
his fringed scarf, and of his lace-edged cravat. All this took time
and kept Mistress Julia on tenter hooks, the while she felt as if her
temples would burst from their throbbing.

Then, at last, Cousin John looked up at her again.

"Poison," he said drily; "an Italian stiletto an you prefer that
method. An hired assassin in any event--"

A shudder ran down her spine. Had she really harboured these thoughts
herself, and had Cousin John merely put her wild imaginings into
words? Thus crudely put they horrified her--for the moment--and she
looked down almost with loathing on the man who accompanied each grim
suggestion with a leer, which caused his thick lips to part and to
disclose a row of large, uneven teeth stained with tobacco juice and
giving his face a cruel expression like that of a hyena.

"You see, there are always means, fair Cousin," continued Sir John
with pleasing urbanity; "it is only a question of money--and of the
risks which one is prepared to run. Beyond that, I believe, that the
task, though difficult, can be accomplished in Paris. There are some
amiable gentry there ever ready to do your bidding, whatever it may be,
provided you are generous--"

She passed the gossamer handkerchief over her dry lips.

"I had not thought of crime," she murmured.

"Had you not?" he said blandly. "Yet 'tis the most easy solution of the
difficulty."

"But there are others," she insisted.

"I fear not."

Again she paused, then continued, speaking very low, scarce above a
whisper.

"You would help me, of course?"

"I could certainly go over to Paris," he said with marked hesitation,
"always providing I were plentifully supplied with money--a voyage of
reconnaissance, you understand--nothing more--"

"Which means that you will not help me."

"The risks are too great, Cousin--I--"

"You would not care to run them, in order to be of service to me?"

"Frankly--no!"

"And suppose, Cousin John," she now said more quietly, once more
sitting down beside him, "supposing, I say for the sake of argument,
that I were to come to you and tell you that I will give half of my
fortune to the man who will at this juncture so ordinate matters that
my marriage with the Earl of Stowmaries once more becomes not only
feasible, but inevitable. What then?"

"Then--also for the sake of argument," he rejoined blandly, "I would
ask you, fair Cousin, of what your fortune consists."

"Squire Peyton left me £20,000 and the principal is still intact."

"Deposited--where?"

"The bulk of it with Mr. Brooke the goldsmith. He pays me six per cent.
per year thereon. It hath sufficed for my needs. No one--except you,
Cousin, now--knows the extent of this fortune. Half of it will suffice
me for pin money, once I am Countess of Stowmaries. My lord would marry
me--if he were free--an I had not a groat to my name, nor more than one
gown to my back. Ten thousand pounds shall be yours, Cousin, if you can
bring this about."

"Call it £12,000, Mistress, and it shall be done," he said cynically.

"How will you do it?"

"Let that be my secret for the nonce."

"I'll give you no advance, remember," she said quickly, for she had
seen the swift glitter of joy in his eyes, at the first mention of
money, and she knew full well that she could not count on the most
elementary feelings of honesty on the part of this unscrupulous gambler.

"Then I can do nothing," he concluded decisively.

"What do you mean?"

"Only this, fair Cousin, that putting aside the question--a somewhat
humiliating one for me, you must admit--that your refusal to place
certain funds in advance in my hands, implies a singular and--if I may
say so--an ill-considered want of trust on your part; putting this
question aside, I say, you must understand that nothing in this present
world can be accomplished without money, and I am reduced to my last
shilling."

"Have I not said that £10,000 shall be yours the day that my marriage
with Lord Stowmaries is irrevocably settled?"

"£12,000," he corrected suavely.

"Very well, then, £12,000. We'll have the bond duly writ out and
signed."

"And you, fair Cousin, will immediately place in my hands a first
instalment of £2,000."

"Failing which?"

"As I have had the honour to tell you, I can do nothing. This is my
last word, fair Cousin," he added, seeing that Mistress Julia still
seemed inclined to hesitate.

There was silence in the little room for a few seconds, a silence all
complete save for the solemn ticking of a little French clock over
the hearth. Sir John Ayloffe lounging on the settee with one firm leg
clad in the new-fashioned tight breeches stretched out at full length,
the other doubled inwards, so that the satin shimmered and crackled
over his knee, his jewelled hands toying with the lace cravat, or
with the dark curls of his periwig, looked now the picture of supreme
indifference.

It almost seemed as if £12,000 more or less in his vest pocket would
affect him not at all. But the fleshy lids had half-closed over the
prominent eyes, and from beneath their folds he was watching the
fair young widow, who made no attempt to hide her hesitancy and her
perturbation.

He knew quite well that his personality, the weight of his whole
individuality, would win against her prudence in the end. He was fully
aware that among the crowd of her several adorers, she had no one to
whom she could confide her present troubles, no one whose aid she could
with so much surety invoke. Few were so resourceful, none quite so
unscrupulous, as Sir John Ayloffe where his own interests were at stake.

That £12,000 which was to be his price would mean the final ending of
his shiftless career. He felt himself getting older every day, and
the thought of what the morrow might bring--a morrow when he would no
longer be active and alert, neither amusing nor interesting to those
whose company was a necessity to his livelihood--that thought was
embittering his present life, until at times he wondered whether a
self-inflicted sword thrust to end a miserable existence were not the
most desirable contingency after all.

How he would earn that £12,000 he did not know as yet. His secret was
that he did not know. But he had lived for the past twenty years in
sublime ignorance of the various shifts which he might be put to from
day to day, and he knew that he could trust to his imagination to find
a means now, when the result would mean security in old age, peace from
that eternal war against chance--almost a fortune in these days when
money was scarce after the great turmoil of civil war.

Therefore, though he said no more, though he assumed an indifference
which he was very far from feeling, he not only watched Mistress Julia,
but with every nerve within him, with all the magnetism of his powerful
personality, he willed her to accede to his wishes.

She, feeling this subtle influence in the same manner as in ages to
come mediums were destined to feel the influence of hypnotic power,
she gradually yielded to his unspoken desire--yielded to him whilst
believing that she held the threads of her own destiny, and that the
final decision only rested with her.

Then she rose and went to that same little bureau in the angle of the
room, at which just an hour ago she had penned so laboriously the
missive which had summoned Sir John Ayloffe hither. This time, as she
sat down to it, she took from beneath her kerchief a small key which
was fastened round her neck by a silk ribbon. With this she opened
one of the drawers of the bureau, and after another moment of final
hesitation she deliberately took a packet from the drawer.

The packet was tied up with green cord; this she untied with a hand
that trembled somewhat with feverish excitement. Having selected a
paper from among a number of others, she once more fastened the green
cord, replaced the packet in the drawer, locked the latter and replaced
the key in the folds of her gown.

Then paper in hand she turned back to the settee whereon lolled Sir
John Ayloffe, and holding the paper out to him, she said:

"This is an order requesting Master Brooke, goldsmith, of Minchin Lane,
to hand over to you on my behalf the sum of £2,000."

Sir John roused himself from his well-studied apathy. He took the paper
from Mistress Julia's hand, looked at it very carefully, then folded
it and prepared to slip it in his breast pocket.

"Remember, Cousin," she said calmly, "that if I find that you have
deceived me in this, that you have deliberately robbed me of this
£2,000 without having any intention or power to help me in my need,
that, in such a case you will lose the only friend you have in the
world. I will turn my back on you for ever; you shall never darken the
threshold of my door, and if I saw you in want or in a debtor's prison,
I would not pay one farthing to help you in your need. You believe
that, do you not?"

"I believe that a woman thwarted is capable of anything," he retorted
with a sneer.

"There I think you are right, Cousin," she assented, whilst a look of
determination which assorted strangely with her otherwise impulsive
ways marred for a moment the childlike prettiness of her face. "You
would find me very hard and unforgiving, if you cheated me of my hopes."

"Very hard, I doubt not," he said blandly. "Did I not see a while ago,
fair Cousin, your gentle soul taking in with scarce a thought of horror
my first suggestion of poison or hired assassin?"

"Tush, man! prate not so lightly of these things. Bah!" she added with
some of her former vehemence, "there are other things that kill besides
poison or stilettos--things that hurt worse than death--things that no
Countess of Stowmaries could endure and live. You have your £2,000,
man--go--go and think--a fortune an you succeed."

Sir John Ayloffe smiled. The lady had at last shown to him--mayhap
without meaning to do so--the real desire of her heart. She had also
set his active brain athinking. As she said, it would be a fortune if
he succeeded.

He had placed the valuable paper carefully away in his breast pocket;
he tapped this pocket gently to feel that it was secure. Then--as
obviously the interview must now come to an end--he rose to go.

Vague thoughts were already floating in his mind, and when she too rose
to bid him farewell, and her fevered eyes found his and held them, he
responded with a look of distinct encouragement.

Long after Cousin John's footsteps had ceased to echo along the short
flagged corridor, Mistress Julia Peyton sat musing, whilst a sigh of
content and of hope ever and anon escaped her lips. Her face was quite
serene, her expression one of anticipation rather than of trouble.
Never for a moment did a pang of conscience trouble her. Remember,
that the unknown Countess of Stowmaries--the daughter of the Paris
tailor--was but a shadowy personality to her. Less than two hours ago,
Mistress Julia was not aware of her existence.

Was it wrong then to wish her out of the way? With commendable
satisfaction, the outraged beauty realised that she felt no direct
wish for any bodily harm to come to her successful rival. And pray,
how many women would have had such scruples? A certain feeling of
self-righteousness eased Mistress Julia's soul at the thought.

No. She wished the real and only Countess of Stowmaries no bodily harm.
She had made Cousin John understand that, she hoped. Crime might mean
remorse, which would be unpleasant, also fear of discovery. Mistress
Julia hoped now that she had made Cousin John understand quite clearly
that she wanted neither poison nor hired assassin for the end which
she had in view--not at first at any rate--later on, mayhap--if other
schemes had failed--

There are things which hurt worse than death--and Mistress Julia had
placed in the hands of an unscrupulous gambler the means whereby such
things could easily be brought about.

If such things be crimes, they certainly were not of the kind which
troubled Mistress Julia's conscience.

Having settled these abstract points to her own satisfaction, she
adjourned to her tiring-room and rang for her maid. She told the wench
to prepare that new butter-coloured satin gown with the pink rosebuds
broidered thereon--a vastly becoming gown for setting off the fair
Julia's style of beauty--and also the colverteen pinner which had the
advantage of making any woman look demure. She had her hair redressed
in the newest fashion with immense taure and puffs which made her small
head look wide and her tiny face more childlike and innocent than ever.

She meant to finish the day at the King's Playhouse, there to witness
a vastly diverting comedy by the late Master Shakespeare. She wished
to see and to be seen by His Majesty, by the Duke of York, and all
London society. Knowing that her name would be in everybody's mouth,
she wished to appear radiant with beauty and good spirits, and in
no way concerned with the ugly rumours anent the tailor's daughter
over in Paris, and the ridiculous cock and bull story that my lord of
Stowmaries was other than engaged to wed Mistress Julia Peyton ere the
London season had fully run its course.




                              CHAPTER VII

             Enquire at London 'mongst the taverns there.
                                              --RICHARD II. V. 3.


You know the place well enough, or failing yourself--if so be that
you are less than three-score years and ten--then your father would
remember it well.

It was situate in the Strand until that time, close to its junction
with Fleet Street and within a pebble's throw from St. Clements. A
tall narrow building, raftered and gabled, the timbers painted a dark
chocolate colour, with alternate lines of a luscious creamy tint
rendered mellow with the dirt and smoke of London. It stood on that
selfsame spot two hundred and more years ago, when it was the favourite
resort of that band of young rakes who adorned the Court of the Merry
Monarch.

It were somewhat difficult to say why my lord of Craye, or Sir Anthony
Wykeham, or the Earl of Stowmaries had chosen this very unprepossessing
tavern for their evening assemblies. The exterior, as your father could
tell you, was certainly not inviting, for the gables were all askew,
the stories low and widening one over another, all awry as if ready to
fall, the front door, too, was cracked from corner to corner, nor were
the public rooms much more alluring. In the coffee room the window with
its small panes of bottle glass hardly allowed any daylight to filter
in; the floor had once been neatly covered in bricks, but now most
of these were broken in half, with pieces of them missing, showing
little three-cornered holes which suggested dirt-grubbing insects and
storehouses of dust.

There were other disadvantages, too, about the place, which should
have scared off any fastidious young man however bent on pleasure he
might be, but we have it on M. Misson's own authority--and he was no
great admirer of things English and speaks somewhat ill-naturedly of
everything he saw during his voyage--that the cellars at the sign
of the Three Bears were exceedingly well stocked with Spanish and
Rhenish wines and even with French brandies which were heady and vastly
pleasing to the palate first and to the temper afterwards.

We are also told by that same highly-critical French traveller that
Mistress Janet Foorde, wife of the landlord of the Three Bears, could
turn out a better supper than any other cook in London, and fashioned
a lamprey pie, or a _fricassée_ of rabbits and chickens, in such a
delicious manner that once eaten it could never be forgotten.

Be that as it may, we know it for a fact that in this year of grace
1678 the Tavern in the Strand at the sign of the Three Bears was, every
evening after the hour of eight, frequented by the very élite of London
society. Supper was served in one of the smaller rooms at a table
around which sat those same gentlemen who in the earlier part of the
day had graced His Majesty's levee, or the Court of the unhappy Queen,
or that narrow circle which stood as a phalanx round the person of the
unpopular Duke of York.

The assembly purported to be political. There was more than a mere
suggestion of Roman Catholic discontent freely expressed around that
congenial board, and it was well known that on more than one occasion
the King himself had been present at these gatherings--incognito, of
course--his identity known only to his own intimate friends.

But the discussion of the political and social position of Roman
Catholics in England, was, we must admit, not the primary object of the
nightly reunions in the private room at the Three Bears. Supper after
the play in the King's House came first, then dice, hazard or the more
fashionable game of Spanish ombre, all well interlarded with the chief
gossip and scandals of the day.

Reputations for beauty, wit or morals were made or marred around that
table in the small room; the latest fashions were discussed, which
to adopt and which to reject. The young fops fresh from the Grand
Tour here recounted their impressions, displayed--for approval or
disfavour--the latest modes from Paris, the new surcoats, the monstrous
periwigs, the very latest notion in lace cravats.

Here, too, the young rakes aired their--oft scandalous--literary
efforts, bonsmots unfit for ladies' ears were invented and retailed,
and we all know that my lord of Rochester never thought of publishing
verse or prose without first submitting it to the censorship of the
select party at the Three Bears.

We may take it that Sir John Ayloffe--despite the vicissitudes of
fortune which had brought him to the pass of empty pockets and
of unavowable shifts--was still a _persona grata_ at the nightly
assemblies of the distinguished tavern, for some few hours after his
interview with his beautiful kinswoman on this memorable evening of
February 8th, 1678, we see him turning his footsteps unhesitatingly in
the direction of the "Three Bears" in the Strand.

Closely wrapped in his cloak, for the wind blew bitter gusts, he bent
his head against the driving rain as he walked. The rickety door of the
tavern stood invitingly open and as one accustomed to the place Sir
John with quickened steps entered the narrow passage.

Immediately his nostrils were greeted with the pungent odour of onions
and of boiling fat, and his ears with loud shouts of merriment, which
raised a boisterous echo in the tumble-down building and seemed to make
the walls totter on their insecure foundation.

This hilarious noise, wherein songs, sung in hoarse voices very much
out of tune, mingled with violent outbursts of prolonged laughter and
with volleys of full-toned oaths, proceeded from behind a door on the
cracked panels of which the ten letters of the word Coffee Room tumbled
one against the other, like a row of drunken men.

For a moment Sir John paused just outside that door, bending his ear to
listen in an attitude of deep attention, like one trying to catch one
special sound from out that confused babel which went on within.

The passage in which he stood had been wholly dark but for the dim,
uncertain light which came from a brass lanthorn suspended from the
blackened ceiling just above his head. Sir John waited a second or two,
until a loud and merry shout of laughter rose above the bibulous din.
It was the laughter which comes from a young and lusty throat, the
laughter of careless irresponsibility and of thoughtless debauchery.

It seemed to be also the sound for which Sir John had been waiting in
the ill-lighted passage outside, for now he threw up his head and flung
his cloak back with a gesture of satisfaction, whilst a strange laugh,
which had but little of merriment in it and a great deal of contempt,
broke from his lips as an echo to the light-hearted gaiety beyond.

Sir John now continued his way, past the Coffee Room to a door beyond
the stairway at the extreme end of the passage. This he threw open
without further ceremony and found himself in that small room of the
tavern, wherein Master Foorde--the host--served his more distinguished
guests. As a rule merriment and noise, equal at least to that which
obtained in the public coffee room, reigned in this private sanctum:
many would have said that the great and courtly gentlemen who
foregathered here indulged usually in carouses and drunken orgies which
would have put the more plebeian merrimakers to shame.

But to-night, at the moment that Ayloffe entered the room, a kind of
sullen silence reigned therein. Through the thick haze of tobacco
smoke which hung like a grey pall above the feebly flickering light
of some half dozen tallow candles, the newcomer could perceive four
faces--flushed with wine and heavy meats, dimly outlined against the
full greyness of drab-coloured walls, and dark oak wainscotting.

The candles themselves guttering in their sockets threw forth fillets
of thick grimy smoke which mingled with the fumes of tobacco, and
helped to cast fantastic and trembling shadows on fine cloth surcoats
and vests of broidered silk. From the coffee room immediately adjoining
the parlour came--echoing faintly through the thick timbered walls--the
shouts of laughter, the loudly-uttered oaths, the ribald songs of the
merry company, and at intervals, against the tiny panes of the small
casement window the dull patter of the rain or the occasional distant
call of the watchman challenging an evening prowler.

In the furthest angle of the room, my lord Rochester seated in the
chair of honour had apparently been reading aloud to this moody
company, the expressions of his latest poetic fancy. He was in the
act of rolling up his manuscript and tying it up with a length of
rose-coloured ribbon, but his face usually so self-satisfied and so gay
bore an expression of keen discontent.

As a rule his poems--highly prized by the king and the ladies--were
listened to here among the circle of his intimates with the greatest
delight and oft with noisy appreciation. But on this occasion he had
been quite unable to hold the attention of his audience, and even
whilst he read his most impassioned verses he could not help but notice
that all eyes were fixed on the young Earl of Stowmaries, who sat with
his head resting in his hand, leaning forward half across the table in
an attitude of the deepest dejection.

The young man had arrived late, only joining the convivial party when
supper was already at an end, and Mistress Foorde had removed the
remains of the finest venison pie which she had ever concocted.

He had taken his place at the table after a curt and sullen nod to
the company who had greeted him most sympathetically. He had declared
himself unable to eat, but had ordered a bottle of strong sherry
and also a bottle of brandy, which expensive liquid--so 'twas said
afterwards by some of the company present--he freely mixed with sherry
and drank very plentifully.

The story of his unfortunate early marriage and of his hopeless passion
for Mistress Julia Peyton had somehow or other leaked out, and before
his arrival had been freely discussed in a facetious and irresponsible
spirit.

"Old Rowley liked the tale, and was vastly amused thereby," Lord
Rochester had said, thus unceremoniously referring to the merry
King of England. "I told it him in all its bearings, and he laughed
immoderately at thought of a tailor's wench being actually married
to my lord of Stowmaries, and expecting to be presented at Court. But
after that first outburst of hilarity he looked very grave and said
that the matter must presently be arranged to the satisfaction of all
those concerned."

"But how can that be done?" queried Sir Anthony Wykeham, who was a
strict Catholic and liked not this light talk of breaking marriage vows.

"Bah! money will do a great deal nowadays," sighed Sir Knaith Bullock,
a young Irishman but scantily blessed with the commodity.

"As for me," quoth my lord Rochester with easy bonhomme, "I am on
the side of the angels. Mistress Julia Peyton is the most beautiful
woman in London. She at any rate would be worthy to become chatelaine
of Maries Castle and to be our hostess in the many feasts to be
given there to my lord of Stowmaries' friends. As for a tailor's
daughter!--Bah!--gentlemen, I ask you, can we see ourselves being
entertained by a tailor's daughter? She would feed us on pottage and
small beer--"

A roar of laughter greeted this exposé of the situation. Lord Rochester
had of a truth voiced the opinion of the majority.

"But--" protested Sir Anthony Wykeham.

"Tush man," interrupted my lord with scant ceremony. "I know what you
would say. The marriage sacrament and all that--Odd's fish! we are none
of us heathens, and ye Papists are not the only ones, by my faith!
who know how to keep vows. But there are other ways of unravelling
an undesired tangle--and old Rowley had no thought of suggesting
irreligious measures--"

"Hush!" said one of the others suddenly, "I hear Stowmaries' voice
outside. I fancy he'll not be in a mood for jesting over the matter."

It was at this point that Stowmaries had entered the room. There was
no doubt that he looked excessively glum, and the first attempts at
treating his disappointed love in a hilarious manner were met with such
obvious moodiness, that gradually the subject was dropped, and the
company, who at supper had been fairly numerous, soon began to dwindle
away, each seeking in turn more cheerful society than that of this
sober young man who seemed determined to look at his own future life in
its very blackest aspect.

Only Lord Rochester remained awhile longer for he wanted an audience
for his latest poem, also Sir Anthony Wykeham--an intimate friend of
my lord Stowmaries--and Sir Knaith Bullock, an irresponsible youth
who seemed to scent an adventure in the romantic child-marriage, and
vaguely hoped to find sport therein.

These three gentlemen with Lord Stowmaries himself formed the little
group around the table of the private parlour at the "Three Bears" at
the moment that Sir John Ayloffe entered it.




                             CHAPTER VIII

               I was a nameless man; you needed me:
               Why did I proffer you my aid? there stood
               A certain pretty cousin at your side.
                                                     --BROWNING.


With a quick glance thrown on each of the four faces, shrewd Sir John
had quickly appraised the mood of this small clique. Stowmaries in
sullen rage against the whole world because of this thwarting of his
most cherished desire, Rochester and the Irishman, flippant and eager
for sport, with Wykeham as the sobering influence, the self-constituted
guardian of religious obligations.

It was also obvious to this keen observer of other people's moods that
there would be no need for circumlocution. Though silence reigned in
the room, the subject of Stowmaries' marriage was uppermost in the
minds of his friends.

Sir John therefore, having thrown aside his hat and cloak, went boldly
up to the table and greeting the others with easy familiarity, he
placed one fleshy hand on Stowmaries' shoulder and said abruptly:

"Tush man! be not so downhearted. My faith on it! have I not seen worse
plights even than yours? Yet from which a man of daring and resource
soon found a means of extricating himself."

The interruption was a welcome one, for though Sir John Ayloffe was no
longer very popular with the gilded clique of young and noble rakes,
since he was known to be at his last resources and was oft in sore
straits to pay his gaming debts, nevertheless at this moment his lusty,
cheery voice helped to dissipate the gloom which was such an unusual
atmosphere for these ribald pleasure-seekers to breathe, and one or two
voices with obvious signs of relief cordially invited the newcomer to
sit.

"Then you, too, know our friend's melancholy story?" queried Lord
Rochester as he pushed with hospitable intent a mug of wine in the
direction of Ayloffe.

"Yes," replied the latter. "Mistress Julia Peyton is my kinswoman. 'Tis
from her I heard the tale."

Stowmaries' frown grew even darker than before. He liked not the
suggestion thus implied, the more than obvious hint of this second
sentimental complication in his life.

Sir John, in the meanwhile, had selected a chair, which was less
rickety than most, and sat down deliberately in such a position that
not one of the flickering and uncertain rays of candle light touched
his face or illumined its expression.

He took the cup of wine offered him by my lord Rochester and drank it
down slowly and at one draught, the while a few ribald remarks flew
across the table. Ayloffe's advent seemed certainly to have brought a
new atmosphere into the room. Despite Stowmaries' frown and Wykeham's
protests, Rochester and Sir Knaith took up the lighter side of the past
events; they refused to appreciate the solemnity of the subject or the
serious obligations resulting from that solemn sacrament of matrimony
performed between children over eighteen years ago.

Sir John waited patiently whilst a volley of somewhat coarse jests was
fired at the gloomy hero of the romantic adventure, and until he saw
that Stowmaries was on the verge of losing his temper, and Wykeham on
the point of quarrelling with Bullock.

Then he pushed the empty cup away from him and leaning forward across
the table, he broke in quietly: "Nay Sir Anthony," he said with
pleasing urbanity, "we all know what you would say. 'Sdeath! an I
mistake not you have harped on that string passing often in the last
hour or so, and we all know too that Lord Stowmaries is not desirous
of seeing it snap. But I maintain that if a gentleman is placed in so
terrible a predicament as is my lord, then it is the duty of all his
friends to try and effect an honourable rescue."

The earnestness with which he spoke had silenced the jocose as well as
the moody tongues. But Sir Anthony Wykeham now protested hotly.

"That is impossible," he said. "The sacrament of marriage cannot be set
aside."

"Only under certain conditions," corrected Sir John.

"Methinks this is braggart's talk," muttered young Bullock who had no
love for the older man.

"How will you do it?" queried Stowmaries with moody hopelessness.

"With his tongue chiefly," sneered the Irishman.

But Ayloffe seemed in no way abashed by the hostility, which his
statement had evoked; he returned the sarcastic or angry glances
levelled at him with a stare of assurance.

Leaning heavily upon the table, his prominent eyes fixed boldly on
the over-excited faces before him, he looked a strange contrast to
the small, chattering crowd which was grouped around him. Unlike the
others, he had supped soberly at home and drunk little or no wine; his
head was clear, his tongue glib, and the only uncertainty apparent in
his demeanour was that with which from time to time he seemed to be
listening to the noise in the next room; then a look of vague doubt
would suddenly overshadow his steady gaze and cause a more furtive,
more anxious look to creep into his eyes.

"Nay, gentlemen," he resumed after a slight pause vaguely smiling in
a condescending manner like one who tells an obvious fact to a child,
"'tis no braggart's talk to speak of saving a friend from the most dire
calamity that can befall any man. I repeat most emphatically that this
can be done, effectually and easily and without interfering with any of
those religious scruples which do my lord of Stowmaries and his friend
here so much honour."

He spoke so quietly, so confidently and with such an air of certitude
that instinctively the sneering tongues ceased to aim their shafts at
him and four pairs of eyes were now fixed upon the speaker, who with a
calm gesture of indifference was readjusting the lace of his cravat.

He waited thus for awhile like the true entertainer who husbands his
effects; he waited until the circle round him drew closer and closer,
until four pairs of elbows rested on the table and flagons and mugs
were impatiently pushed aside.

Sir Anthony Wykeham was the last to hold aloof, but even he said at
last with a distinct ring of excitement in his voice:

"Tell us more fully what you mean, man! Cannot you see that Stowmaries
is devoured with impatience?"

"An impatience which I am over-anxious to relieve," rejoined Ayloffe
imperturbably, "but firstly let me ask Lord Stowmaries himself--who I
assert is a wealthy man--whether he would not give a good tenth of his
fortune to be conveniently rid of an unwelcome wife, without hindrance
to his belief or conscience."

"I would give half my fortune, good Sir John," sighed Stowmaries
dolefully.

"Half is too much, good my lord," responded Sir John blandly. "Popular
rumour deems your lordship worth some four hundred thousand pounds in
solid cash, besides the rent rolls of half Hertfordshire. Methinks one
fourth of that should purchase the freedom which you seek."

"Are you minded to earn that fortune, Sir John?" asked the other not
without a sneer.

"Nay, my lord, I am neither young enough, nor sufficiently
well-favoured for that desirable task," retorted Sir John imperturbably.

"What have looks or favours to do with it all? Odd's fish!" growled
Stowmaries more vehemently, and bringing a clenched fist crashing down
upon the table so that mugs and bottles rattled, "meseems that you,
Sir John, are trying to fool me, God help me! are even trying to bring
ridicule upon my sorrow! By the Mass, sir, if that be so, you'll not
find me in a mood to be trifled with."

"Good my lord, I pray you to calm your temper. Am I a man to trifle
with your feelings? Have I not professed myself to be your friend? am I
not the kinsman of the lady whom you have honoured with your addresses?
On mine honour I have her welfare at heart even more so than yours. Can
you wonder that I should wish to see you wed her?"

Shrewd Sir John had played a trump card. There was no denying the logic
of his statement. He had owned to having much at stake, yet had done
so with no lack of dignity. With a certain graciousness not altogether
free as yet from his original surliness, Lord Stowmaries owned himself
in the wrong.

"You must pardon my evil temper, Sir John," he said with a
self-deprecating sigh, "for I am vastly troubled."

This brief interlude had but whetted the curiosity of the others. From
Sir John's manner and mode of speech it was fully evident now that his
was no empty talk, but that he had assuredly come here this night, with
some definite plan for what he termed the welfare of his kinswoman,
which no doubt he had much at heart.

The idea pleased these young pleasure-seekers more and more; they cared
of a truth but little for the troubles of their friends, but there
was now a twinkle in Ayloffe's eyes which vaguely suggested to them
the thought of intrigue, mayhap of some adventure, quite unavowable,
possibly highly scandalous, which would have that unknown tailor's
daughter for its victim.

Such adventures were the delight of the merry monarch who now sat upon
the English throne, whose advent had been so earnestly desired, whose
personality had been so ardently worshipped. He it was who set the
fashion for those gallant episodes which were the boast and delectation
of men and the shame and the sorrow of women. But for him and the
example set by him I doubt if Sir John Ayloffe would ever have thought
of formulating proposals which should have put his present companions
to the blush, and which carried subsequently in their train agonies of
remorse and of disgrace, wounded honour and more than one broken heart.




                              CHAPTER IX

           Strictly, 'tis what good people style untruth
           But yet, so far, not quite the full-grown thing!
                                                     --BROWNING.


Sir John Ayloffe leaned back in his chair, and satisfied that he once
more held the close attention of the company, he resumed pleasantly:

"Will you, good my lord, and all of you gallant gentlemen grant me five
minutes wherein to place before you the situation as it at present
stands? Here is my lord of Stowmaries tied by so-called indissoluble
marriage vows to a bride whom he doth not desire for wife, and whom
he last saw borne away kicking and screaming in the arms of a waiting
wench. And there over in Paris is the daughter of a worthy tailor,
a girl born in a back shop, presumably ill-favoured and certainly
vulgar, but who has pretensions of being Countess of Stowmaries _de
facto_ as well as _de jure_. She it was who eighteen years ago was as
aforesaid borne away kicking and screaming in the arms of a waiting
wench. She was then not much more than twelve months of age, and has
not since that moment seen my lord of Stowmaries here, our gracious,
if--momentarily--somewhat troubled friend."

A sneering grunt from Sir Knaith Bullock, a groan from Stowmaries and
a murmur of assent from the others were audible whilst Sir John paused
for breath.

"The Catholic Church for which we all have deep respect," continued
Ayloffe, "doth not allow that the bonds of matrimony thus contracted
eighteen years ago shall be severed just because my lord of Stowmaries
doth not happen for the moment to have a desire for the tailor's
daughter; she having done naught to merit repudiation, since her being
carried away kicking and screaming from the presence of her lord when
her age had not reached fifteen months, doth not constitute a serious
offence in the eyes of the law."

"We know all that, man, we know all that," quoth Stowmaries moodily,
"and by the Mass you repeat yourself like a country parson in the
pulpit."

"Gently, good my lord," rejoined Ayloffe imperturbably. "What I have
to say is a somewhat delicate matter. I am dealing with a Countess of
Stowmaries--and if you did not accept my scheme--"

He paused and shrugged his shoulders in token of self-deprecation.

"It may not after all meet with your favour."

"Out with it, man--out with it," came, partly gaily, wholly impatiently
from every side.

"'Tis simple enough," said Sir John, "but were easier to say an you,
gentlemen, would help me by guessing--My lord of Stowmaries hath not
seen his bride, nor was he seen by her, since she was little more than
a year old--that is so, my lord, is it not?"

"It is," assented Stowmaries curtly.

"Impressions at that age are not lasting. Infantile memory doth not
hold an image. We may assume that if the tailor's daughter were placed
in the presence of--er--of any gentleman of noble bearing, she would
not know if he were her lord--or not."

There was silence around the table now. Neither assent nor dissent
followed Ayloffe's last words. On the face of the young Irishman
curiosity still remained impressed. The suggestion so slightly hinted
at had not yet reached his inner consciousness; on that of Lord
Rochester comprehension had just begun to dawn, a sense of astonishment
plainly struggled with one of doubt. But Sir Anthony Wykeham almost
imperceptibly drew his chair somewhat away from the table.

Lord Stowmaries in the meanwhile kept his eyes steadily fixed on those
of Sir John. They expressed neither doubt nor astonishment, only
intense excitement, an obvious desire to hear that hint more fully
explained. It was his hoarse mutter "Go on! curse you--why don't you go
on?" that first broke the momentary silence which had fallen over the
small assembly.

"Nay!" rejoined Ayloffe blandly, "I see that you, at least, my lord,
have already taken me. Is not my scheme vastly simple? The tailor's
daughter awaits her lord. He comes. She falls into his arms, and after
the usual festivities in the back shop of her estimable parents, the
bridegroom takes his bride home to far-off England. But mark what hath
occurred--it was not my lord of Stowmaries who had gone to claim his
bride, but some other man who prompted by his passion for the tailor's
beautiful daughter, a passion--we might even suppose--encouraged by
the lady herself, had impersonated the bridegroom and snatched the
golden prize despite my lord of Stowmaries and the most solemn vows
of matrimony contracted eighteen years ago. Imagine the result: the
shame, the crying scandal! My lord of Stowmaries is of a surety no
longer bound to acknowledge a wife whose very name will have become a
byword for every gossip to peck at, and whose virtue hath already been
the toy of an adventurer as unscrupulous as he was daring. Not the
Catholic Church, not the law of England, nor the decree of the Pope
would enforce the original marriage vows after that. I give you my
word, gentlemen, that my lord of Stowmaries will be granted leave by
every high tribunal, spiritual or temporal, to repudiate the wench who
had thus disgraced his name."

Sir John Ayloffe had long finished speaking and silence still reigned
all around him. Even the noise in the next room seemed for the moment
unaccountably to have ceased. Folk say that when such silences occur
in merry company, angels fly across the room, and the flutter of their
wings can distinctly be heard. What angels then were these who haunted
the private room of the "Three Bears" now? What record of ignominy and
dishonour did they mark upon the tablets of infinity when with gentle
flutter of wings they passed silently by? To the credit of all these
gentlemen here present be it said, that their first feeling was one
of shame, when they fully understood the dastardly suggestion which
Sir John was making to one of themselves; but the shame was not acute
enough to produce horrified repudiation.

Sir Anthony Wykeham certainly still held aloof, but Stowmaries had not
winced. That he understood the suggestion to the full, there could be
no doubt. His face had flushed to the roots of his hair, his fingers
were fidgeting nervously against one another and excitement verging on
intoxication caused his eyes to glow with an unnatural inward fire. His
thoughts had flown straight back to the prettily furnished parlour in
Holborn Row, to Mistress Julia Peyton's violet eyes and the exquisite
scent of her white hands when he had pressed them to his lips. His love
for her--call it passion or desire an you will--had grown in intensity
as the obstacle which separated him from her had seemed more and more
insurmountable. In the past few hours that same passion had reached a
stage of fever heat, impatient at control, chafing at impotence and
longing for satisfaction with all the strength of thwarted desire.

Rupert Kestyon, Earl of Stowmaries and Riveaulx, had been brought
up in the hard school of colonial life; in his boyhood he had been
denied every kind of pleasure and luxury in which the sense of youth
revels, through what he called an unjust Fate; then suddenly he had
seen himself thrown in the very lap of Fortune, his every desire
satisfied and his every whim made law. The change was sudden enough to
throw off its balance a more firm character than that of the son of
Captain Kestyon--spendthrift, profligate, a rogue from temperament.
Like his father's, Rupert's was essentially a weak nature. He had
never attempted to fight Fate, when Fate was against him. When
Fortune smiled, he took everything she offered him without attempt at
restraint;--and the jade had become very lavish with her gifts to the
young outcast who awhile ago had often enough been obliged to tighten
his belt against the gnawing pangs of hunger.

He had found friends, followers, sycophants; had been favoured by
royalty and smiled on by beauty, but Mistress Peyton was the first
passion in his life. He had flirted with her for months, made easy
love to her for weeks, but he had not realised that he loved her until
twenty-four hours ago when he knew that she was lost to him.

The knowledge that here was the chief desire of his heart, and that
this desire he could not gratify, despite his position, his personality
and his wealth, almost unhinged his mind. It was two years now since he
had exercised any self-denial. He had lost all knowledge of that useful
art, and was determined not to learn it again.

The day on which he heard that through an appalling catastrophe, which
had swept his kindred into the sea and broken the heart of an old man,
he, Rupert Kestyon, the penniless son of a spendthrift father, had
become rich, influential, one of the greatest gentlemen in the kingdom,
he had said with a sigh of genuine satisfaction: "Now I mean to live!"
and with him living meant solely the gratification of his every wish.
Now he saw his greatest wish in all the world born only to be thwarted.

It was monstrous, unthinkable! But from that wholesome fear of
ecclesiastical authority peculiar in those days to men of his creed, he
would have rebelled. Respect for the Church to which he belonged, dread
of a scandal which might tarnish the great name he bore, and undermine
his pleasant position alone caused him to be submissive.

He was not clever enough to find out a means of freeing himself from
irksome bonds, and had drained the cup of despair to its bitter dregs
without thinking or even hoping for an issue out of his misery.

But now a man spoke--a man whom in his saner moments he heartily
despised, whom he knew to be shiftless, unscrupulous, a born
gambler--but yet a man who showed him a way out of the quagmire of
despair into a possible haven of hope.

He had not been long in catching Ayloffe's meaning. Whilst the others
doubted he had already seen the possibilities of success. His bride had
never seen him since consciousness grew into her brain; her parents'
only recollections of himself dated back eighteen years! Why indeed
should not some other man impersonate the bridegroom, carry the bride
away and thus forever after leave on her fair maiden name a stain which
would render her unfit to be acknowledged as the wife of any honourable
gentleman?

How simple it all seemed!

Unlike his friends here present, Stowmaries saw no shame in the
scheme--no shame, let us say to himself! Disgrace to the woman--yes!
but he did not know her, and he hated the very thought of her! Disgrace
perhaps to the scoundrel who would undertake the ignoble treachery!
but to the Earl of Stowmaries who would sit quietly at home whilst the
roguery was being carried on by others?--'Sblood! who would suggest
such a ridiculous idea?

His eyes wandered round the table. Sir Anthony Wykeham was no
longer frowning and Lord Rochester had laughed--a little nervously
perhaps--but no one had actually protested.

There was no gainsaying the fact that Ayloffe was a rogue to suggest
so profligate a scheme, but profligacy was all the rage now and vastly
pleased the King.

"By Gad, a mad notion!--But a right merry one!" quoth Sir Knaith
Bullock, himself a rogue and as full of dare-devil schemes as an egg is
full of meat.

The remark loudly spoken and accompanied by a blasphemous oath and
the loud banging of a clenched fist against the table, eased the
tension finally. Even Wykeham began to laugh. Not one of these young
men here had wanted to feel ashamed, rather did each one desire to
seem a vast deal worse than his neighbour. It was no good allowing the
recollections of early lessons in chivalry to mar the enjoyment of the
present merry life; not even if those lessons had been taught by a
father who had died fighting for King and cause.

Let the ball of pleasure be set rolling; that ball partly made up of
love of devilry, partly of ennui seeking for amusement and of contempt
for woman's virtue.

"'Twere rare sport!" said Rochester.

Sport! The word acted like magic and shame was completely vanquished by
the pleasing sense of excitement.

Bah! what was the virtue, the fair name, the happiness of a tailor's
daughter worth, in the face of the vastly pleasing entertainment she
herself would provide for her betters.

"An ignoble trick to play on a woman," murmured Wykeham.

But his protest had become very feeble. He saw nothing in the
suggestion that shocked his religious scruples, for the rest he cared
but little. The victim was only a tailor's daughter after all, and
Stowmaries--his friend--would not be the one to repudiate his marriage
vows.

"Bah! a tailor's daughter!" was the gist of the argument in favour of
the scheme.

"She shall have full compensation," quoth my lord Stowmaries somewhat
tonelessly, for his throat felt parched and his tongue seemed to be
several sizes too large for his mouth.

He drank down a large bumper full of sherry into which Ayloffe had
unobtrusively thrown a dash of raw brandy.

"Have you forgotten, gentlemen," now said gallant Sir John lustily,
"that my lord of Stowmaries will give seventy thousand pounds to the
friend who will help him in his need. A fortune methinks, which should
tempt any young gallant in search of romantic adventure and a pretty
wife."

"But the details, man! the details!" came from every side, "surely you
have thought of them!"

"And of the risks!" suggested Lord Rochester, who was practical, and
who had oft suffered because of his gallant adventures.

"There are no risks, gentlemen," quoth Sir John Ayloffe, "not to us
at any rate, nor yet to my lord Stowmaries. As for the tailor and
his family, believe me they will be so covered with ridicule, that
they will not cause his lordship a moment's anxiety. Just think on
it! To give away one's daughter to a man who is not her husband! to
greet him with festivities and merrimaking, to kill the fatted calf
in honour of the man who brings dishonour into one's home! Nay! Nay!
The breeches-maker of Paris will have cause to keep silent after the
adventure. The maid perchance will retire into a convent, and the
gallant adventurer can brave the world in comfort with seventy thousand
pounds in his pocket."

"Bravo! Well said!--But the details?--how will you work, it, Ayloffe?"

Obviously the scheme was commending itself more and more to these
over-heated brains. There were no shame-faced looks round the table
now. Stowmaries did not speak; his excitement was too keen to find vent
in words, and he was shrewd enough to realise at once that Ayloffe did
not mean to give away the details of his plans to this trio of young
addle-pated rakes.

But cries of "The details, man, the details!" became more and more
insistent. Sir John, glass in hand, at last rose in response.

"The details are simple enough, gentlemen, and now that I have your
approbation, I will be quick enough in working them out. In the
meanwhile let us drink to the gallant adventurer who must help us in
our scheme. We do not yet know his name, who he is or whence he comes;
the fairy Prince who will free my lord Stowmaries from irksome bondage
and the tailor's daughter from the fetters of a respectable home. What
we do know is that this Prince must be young, else he could not pass
for milor of Stowmaries, he must be well-favoured, else the lady might
fight shy of him; but he may be as poor as the proverbial church
mouse, since seventy thousand pounds, and the fortune of the richest
tailor in Paris are jointly to be his. Come, gentlemen, will you take
my toast?"

Loud banging of pewter mugs against the deal table greeted this merry
sally. The young men jumped to their feet.

"To him! To the unknown!" they shouted laughing with one accord. There
were loud calls for Master Foorde, and confused orders for more Spanish
wine. Sir John called for brandy, and anon when the worthy hosteler
filled the bumpers all round the table, Ayloffe followed him adding
brandy here and there to the wine, laughingly insistent, praising
the quality of the liquor for inducing to gaiety and all the elegant
qualities of amiable drunkenness so fashionable in a gentleman of the
period.

He was quite clever enough not to make any further direct allusions to
the scheme, the realisation of which meant the transference of twelve
thousand pounds from Mistress Julia Peyton's pocket into his own. So
far he had gained the first stake in the game which he had set himself
to play, and was content for the moment merely to addle still further
the heads of these young reprobates by wild talks of adventure, and
sly allusions to the delights of coming scandal, mixed with sweeping
sarcasm directed at feminine virtue in general and the morals of the
Paris bourgeoisie in particular.

He knew well enough that Stowmaries was at one with him by now, but
that he never would have succeeded in persuading the young man to enter
into such villainous schemes, if he had been alone with him.

Away from the glamour of his rakish friends, of the atmosphere of the
tavern, of the smell of wine and tobacco, Stowmaries' better nature
and the inherited instincts of honour would have rebelled against
the roguery. Any of these young men here present would individually
have repudiated the monstrous proposal whilst collectively they were
over-ready to trample on any nascent idea of chivalry, each one ashamed
to be called squeamish or Puritanical by the other. There was nothing
really depraved in these young men, only a desire to outdo each other
in profligacy, in a show of anti-Puritanism, the immediate outcome of
the enforced restraint of the past generation.

Ayloffe knew this, and, therefore, he had chosen the supper hour, and
the presence of a select number of the worst rakes in London--Rochester
and Bullock--for testing Stowmaries' willingness to enter into his own
villainous scheme. He wanted the support of confused brains, of rowdy
excitement, of shouts and of laughter to drown the preliminary call of
conscience. This once smothered, would probably never lift a warning
voice again, and details could be comfortably settled in private later
on.

"Believe me, gentlemen," he said gaily, "that that tailor's minx will
thank us all on her knees for the entertainment which we will provide
for her. Odd's fish and I mistake not she hath but little stomach for
becoming an honourable British matron, and you may be sure that 'tis
only her parents who force her into an unwelcome marriage. We shall be
the rescuers of beauty in distress, and will provide the wench with
such an adventure as will draw the eyes of half Europe upon her and
give her that notoriety which all women prize far beyond those virtues
which are only vaunted by the old and ugly ones of their own sex. A
bumper on it, gentlemen! I pledge the tailor's minx, ill-favoured
though she be--my word on that! she'll become the talk of London--I
drink to her adventure--and to the bold man who will share in it--By
my halidame, were I but twenty years younger, I'd apply for the post
myself."

Ayloffe's irresponsible talk, and the heady wines mixed with alcohol
completed the work of destruction. Lord Stowmaries and his friends
contrived within the next hour or so to lose more self-respect than
their fathers had gained in a lifetime through sublime adherence to a
forlorn cause.




                               CHAPTER X

     But indeed words are very rascals since bonds disgrace them.
                                          --TWELFTH NIGHT III. 1.


I think that we shall have to accept Sir Anthony Wykeham's account of
how the proceedings finally terminated. He avers that by the time the
church clock of St. Clement's had struck the hour of ten, Sir John
Ayloffe was the only man present in that small private room who could
at all be called sober.

At that hour my lord of Rochester it seems lay right across the table
with flushed face hidden in the bend of the elbow, snoring lustily
at intervals and at others lifting a heavy head in order to hurl a
bibulous remark at impassive Sir John or over-excited Stowmaries: Sir
Knaith Bullock had quite frankly exchanged the rickety incertitude of
Master Foorde's chairs for the more solid level of the floor, where
after sundry struggles with a tiresome cravat and a persistently wry
perruque he lay amidst the straw and the unsavoury postprandial debris
that littered it, in comfort and security.

Wykeham, according to his own account, had lapsed into somnolent
sulkiness, vaguely listening to the ribald jests and coarse oaths
uttered by the others, and to the monotonous murmur of Sir John's voice
as he explained the details of his scheme to Stowmaries.

The latter had certainly drunk more brandy than was good for the
clearness of his brain. Excitement, too, had wrought upon his blood,
with the result that the events of this night took on the garb of some
over-vivid dream: but, as soon as he realised that his perceptions
were becoming too confused to take in Ayloffe's varied suggestions, he
made a vigorous effort to regain possession of himself. He called for
a bowl of iced water, and dashed its contents into his face and across
his eyes. After that he steadily refused to drink any more, nor did Sir
John press him any further.

The insinuating poison had done its work: there was no fear now that
Stowmaries would wish to draw back.

"I pray you draw your chair nearer, my lord," said Ayloffe after awhile
when of a truth he saw that the rest of the company was quite helpless,
"these gentlemen are not like to disturb us now."

With unaccountable reluctance Stowmaries did as the older man bade him,
and presently the two men withdrew altogether from out the circle of
dim light thrown by the guttering tallow candles.

"Your lordship, I take it then, agrees with the broad basis of my
scheme," said Ayloffe, speaking quite low, only just above a whisper.
"You are anxious to free yourself from this undesired marriage, and
you think that my suggestion is one which will most easily help you to
accomplish this purpose?"

"That is so," assented Stowmaries readily.

"On the other hand," continued Ayloffe, "your lordship is prepared to
pay the sum of seventy thousand pounds to the man who will impersonate
your lordship in the house of M. Legros, merchant tailor of Paris,
who will--in your name and person--claim the Legros girl as his wife,
and go through the necessary civil and religious ceremonies that will
ratify the original marriage; and, finally, who will undertake not to
reveal his own identity to the tailor's daughter until you, my lord,
will grant him leave. For these services," concluded Sir John with
emphasis, "is your lordship prepared to pay the vast sum of seventy
thousand pounds?"

"More than that," replied Stowmaries in an excited whisper, which
rendered his voice hoarse and his tongue stiff and parched. "More than
that and money down: fifty thousand pounds on that day that he signs
and seals the bargain with me, and starts on his errand for Paris, and
a further seventy thousand on the day that the tailor's daughter leaves
her parents' home in his company. A hundred and twenty thousand pounds!
mine honour! my life upon it. But where in the name of Hell will you
find the man to take it?"

By way of an immediate reply, Sir John placed a warning finger to his
mouth, then rose and beckoning to the other to follow him, he went to
the door which divided the private parlour from the public Coffee Room,
and throwing it open he pointed to the rowdy company who sat assembled
each side of the oblong trestle table.

"Amongst that crowd," he whispered with an insinuating smile.




                              CHAPTER XI

             Good-night, good sleep, good rest from sorrow
             To these that shall not have good morrow.
                                                      --SWINBURNE.


At first when Sir John Ayloffe threw open the door of the public room,
Stowmaries was only conscious of an almost Satanic din; he certainly
could see nothing through the dense cloud of smoke which filled every
corner of the long, narrow hall.

Gradually, however, his eyes, still dimmed from recent libations and
acute excitement, became accustomed to this haze-covered gloom, whilst
his ears distinguished isolated sounds, drunken songs, loud oaths or
hoarse laughter from out the deafening roar which surged towards him
like the noise of breakers against a rock.

A narrow deal table ran from end to end of the room, from the main
door at the top to the small latticed window at the bottom. The floor
was strewn with rushes on which sprawled recumbent figures in various
stages of drunken sleep, in the very midst of a litter of debris,
broken glasses, overthrown mugs, patches of spilt wine or ale, bones
and remnants of pastry and of bread--all evil-smelling and unspeakably
dirty. On the table itself the remnants of pies and cooked meats, and a
forest of empty mugs and bottles. One by one the tallow candles which
had been placed at intervals throughout the whole length of the table
had thrown up their last flicker of feeble light, had spluttered their
last with a hissing sound and finally died out in a column of grimy
smoke.

There were but some half dozen or so left now, which threw uncertain
yellow gleams through the thick veil of tobacco fumes, on the prostrate
figures that sprawled across the table, on overthrown goblets and jugs,
on all the unsavoury debris--remnants of the past orgy.

The rest of the room was in darkness, and through the gloom the figure
of a young man, with flushed face and dark brown hair innocent of
perruque, moved backwards and forwards to the rhythmic cadence of a
boisterous chorus of song.

The draught from the badly-fastened window wafted the strips of
cotton which hung in lieu of curtains, straight into the room, with
a swishing, moaning sound around which--soft though it was--could
be heard like a long drawn-out sigh of pain, in the pauses of lusty
laughter and of ribald song.

The storm outside seemed to have ceased, for, as the curtains blew away
from the window the pale, ghost-like streaks of moonbeams searched
the darkness of that end of the room and found here a fold of satin
tattered and frayed, there a broken paste buckle, or rusty sword hilt
on which to play its weird gamut of faint and ghoulish rays.

The noise was incessant, merriment mixed with quarrelsome oaths, lively
songs alternating with hoarse shouts. All those who were not snoring
babbled incoherently, swore or sang; Irish brogue mingling with broad
Yorkshire tones, round Scotch oaths striking against Gaelic ones,
whilst from time to time, a noisome word loudly flung from end to end
of the table like a filthy rag would rouse one of the sleepers and
spur him to respond to the challenge with vile blasphemy.

At times the clink of a sword would cut sharply through the buzzing
air, the beginnings of a quarrel, a volley of vituperations, a pewter
mug or half-empty bottle thrown right across the table scattering its
contents over tattered coats and already much-stained vests: then the
hoarse admonitions of the peacemakers, the first refrain of a song by
way of a diversion, more lively, more out of tune than before, and
laughter and jests once more reigned supreme.

Stowmaries gazed on this scene, the while he still felt that somnolent
feeling of being in a dream, enveloping his senses. He heard the noise
and saw the figures swaying to and fro, moving on unsteady legs, in
and out of the narrow circles of yellow light like gnomes dancing the
figures of a saraband, in the anteroom of Hell.

The figure of the young man at the extreme end of the room fascinated
him. He could not discern the face clearly, only as a flushed mask with
the pale moonbeams touching the dark hair with their ghostly rays.

"'Tis your cousin Michael," whispered Ayloffe close to his ear.

Stowmaries gave a sudden start. He understood now why Sir John had
shown him this scene, the picture of this rowdy crowd composed of the
ne'er-do-well, unclassed profligates who had flooded the country ever
since the Restoration, hurrying back to England from Flanders or from
Spain, under the guise of Royalist loyalty which had suffered exile for
the great cause, and was now eager and ready for reward.

Boisterous, unscrupulous, disrespecters of persons and of dignity, they
traded on the people's avowed dislike of the canting Puritans who
had ruled in England for so long. Jeering, mocking and carousing they
filled London with their noise, the open scandal of their lives, the
disgrace of their conduct.

By day they paraded the streets loudly singing licentious songs,
dressed in the rags and tatters of cavalier accoutrements long since
thrown away, seeking the peaceful citizen with the Puritan leanings,
who chanced to find himself in their way and holding him up to
ridicule, the butt of their uncontrolled merriment.

By night they filled the taverns and coffee houses of the city and
only the small hours of the morning witnessed their final retirement
into the small brothels of evil repute where alone they could obtain
lodgings.

There were hundreds of these men about the London streets during
the few years which followed the Restoration. The great plague had
decimated them somewhat, the fire of 1666 had scattered some of them
broadcast, but in this present year there were still a goodly number of
them about. They were the terror of the night watchmen and the despair
of the ill-organised and inefficient police-patrols, and rendered the
lesser streets of the city well-nigh impassable to quiet citizens and
to decent women.

And it was amongst these men that Michael Kestyon was most often to be
found; shouting with them by day, drinking and gambling with them by
night. Michael Kestyon, cousin to my lord of Stowmaries and like him
descended from those who in mediæval days had writ their name largely
on the pages of history: Michael, the ne'er-do-well, the wastrel, the
profligate: Michael the idler who strove in such company to forget that
he had been born a gentleman, and that he held a claim to the title and
estates of Stowmaries which many thought was passing just.




                              CHAPTER XII

                                             Oh, the strife
                Of waves at the stone, some devil threw
                In my life's mid-current thwarting God.
                                                      --BROWNING.


For Michael Kestyon was a man with a grievance. A just grievance enough
since many held that he and not his cousin Rupert should have been the
present Earl of Stowmaries.

But possession in those far-off days was even more absolutely an
integral part of the law than it is now. Rupert Kestyon was _de facto_
established at Maries Castle, whilst Michael had to begin life by
selling his sword or his skin to the highest bidder, and all because
his father and grandfather before him had been either very supine or
hideously neglectful of their own respective son's interests to enforce
the decree of King Edward III anent the family succession.

That the decree existed no one attempted to deny; it was embodied
in a document which with other family archives was actually in the
possession of Michael Kestyon the pretender. These papers in fact were
the only inheritance bequeathed to him by his father, besides a legacy
of hatred and covetousness against the usurpers of the name and fortune
of Stowmaries. But ye shall judge if the reigning earls were usurpers
or not.

It seems that in those distant days when Edward III reigned over
England and France, the then Lady of Stowmaries presented her lord
with twin boys, born within an hour of another. Fine boys they were, so
tradition hath it, well grown and sturdy and as like to one another as
two peas lying in the same pod.

The fond mother as she gazed proudly upon these children--who of a
truth were each endowed with a powerful pair of lungs--little guessed
the mischief which their joint arrival would cause in the ancient and
noble family of Kestyon.

According to the laws of military tenure, the eldest of these two
boys--older remember than his own brother only by a short hour or
so--should have been held to be the heir to the titles, dignities,
lands and appurtenances held in fief direct by the Lord of Stowmaries
from his suzerain liege Lord Edward III by the Grace of God King of
England and of France.

But as evil chance--presided over by some imp of mischief--would have
it, the twins--when scarce a few hours old--being placed by my lady's
tiring-woman side by side in the bed, presently took to vigorous
quarrelling. My lady thereupon was much perturbed and her women were
all hastily summoned to her bedside, so that they might administer such
soothing draughts as were usual under the circumstances.

When my lady was once more restored to her former quietude she asked
for her boys, requesting that the eldest be first placed in her arms.

Alas! the mischief was done! The tiring-woman could not remember which
child she had lain on the right side of the bed, and which on the left,
nor could her astuteness combined with the adoring mother's searching
eyes state positively afterwards which boy was heir to the barony of
Stowmaries, and which the mere younger son.

Imagine the confusion which ensued. Stories of innumerable quarrels
between the brothers as they grew up to boyhood's estate have been
handed down to their posterity. The father himself was at a loss what
to do. He had a great love for both his boys, and not knowing which was
the elder and which the younger son, he had a vast fear of doing an
injustice either to the one or to the other.

What could he do but ask the advice and ascertain the wishes of his
suzerain liege? This we are told he did as soon as the children had
reached the mature age of ten and owed military service to their lord.

King Edward III we all know was a model of justice and of sound common
sense. He declared it impossible that either of the boys should be
deprived of what might be his lawful inheritance. Therefore, by a
special decree signed by his own hand manual, he declared that on the
death of his faithful cousin, the Baron of Stowmaries, the title,
estates in fief or military tenure and other lands and appurtenances
thereof should devolve jointly on the twin sons of the said lord, and
that the first born child in the next generation should then once more
reunite in his own person the titles and estates of Stowmaries.

Moreover the King decreed that if at any future time, a Lady of
Stowmaries should take it into her gracious head to present her lord
with twins, this same rule of succession should apply.

Thus said His Majesty King Edward III, and my lord of Stowmaries was
thereby satisfied. The brothers were henceforth brought up as joint
heirs of one of the finest baronies in the Kingdom and we hear nothing
more of family feuds or dissensions.

That the twins eventually did jointly succeed to their father's
title and estates we know from the records anent the twin Barons of
Stowmaries who fought under the banner of John of Gaunt in the days of
Richard II; and from the fact that King Henry IV in 1410 created the
then Baron of Stowmaries, Earl of Stowmaries and Riveaulx we may infer
that one of those turbulent twins did have a son who succeeded alone
to his father and uncle, and once more united in his own person all
dignities and lands belonging to the ancient family.

Thus the carelessness of a tiring-wench had for the time being no
further serious consequences on the fortunes of the Kestyons. For some
generations to come it seemed that the ladies of Stowmaries had no
predilection for twins. But in the year 1552, so the family archives
tell us, the wife of John, Earl of Stowmaries--Grand Master of the
Ceremonies to King Edward VI--presented her lord with a sturdy pair of
boys.

As like to one another as the proverbial peas were these two new scions
of the ancient family of Kestyon, and mightily proud of them was their
fond mother, but there never was any confusion as to their identity.
One of them--Rupert--was born fully two hours before his brother
Michael, and was ever after looked upon as his father's heir. Nor, on
the death of the Earl, did any one seem to have thought of disputing
his sole right to the title and estates of Stowmaries.

Rupert succeeded his father and in his turn was succeeded by his son.
But what we do know as a certain fact is that Michael, the younger
twin, had a son born to him a full year before his elder brother took
unto himself a wife, and that if the decree of King Edward III had been
duly enforced by law, Rupert and Michael should have been joint Earls
of Stowmaries and it should have been Michael's son--the first born in
the next generation--who should have united the title and estates in
his own person.

Why Michael did not endeavour to enforce the ancient decree of Edward
III we shall never know: there are neither letters nor other documents
to explain this supineness, which is all the more inexplicable since it
affected the future of his own son even more than his own.

We are concerned with the present generation. With Rupert, Earl of
Stowmaries, the direct descendant of the older twin, and with Michael
Kestyon, the grandson of the younger.

Such as I have related is the true history of the grievance which this
Michael nurtured against his cousin whom he deemed an usurper, and
against all his peers, kinsmen and fellow gentlemen for the injustice
which they abetted by admitting that usurper as one of themselves.

But unlike his father and grandfather before him Michael was not
content to see any one else in possession of the family title and
estates, which of a truth should have been his. From his father he had
inherited among other family archives the mediæval document embodying
the decree of Edward III and bearing that monarch's signature. How
and wherefore this had remained as an heirloom in this branch of the
family, tradition does not tell us. The fact seems to suggest that the
younger twin--Michael--may have had some intention of enforcing his
son's claim at a future time--an intention, mayhap, frustrated by death.

The man whom Lord Stowmaries saw at this moment, with flushed face and
unsteady voice singing ribald songs to the accompaniment of boisterous
laughter, chink of dice and sword, and blasphemous oaths, had at one
time taken up his own cause with ardent and heart-whole enthusiasm.

At the age when boyhood first yields to maturity, Michael had lost his
father and thereupon had begun to fight for his rights, with all the
strength of a turbulent nature, full of instincts of luxury and driven
to penury through flagrant injustice. He had spent some of the best
years of his life, in a perpetual appeal to the King and to his peers
to try his cause and if necessary to find it just. But the King was
not fond of settling important questions himself and the Lords' House
of Parliament was overbusy re-establishing a number of its own lapsed
privileges to bother about a claimant with empty pockets.

Driven from pillar to post, Michael appealed to Common Law, to Chancery
and to equity, setting up divers pleas in order to bring his case
within the jurisdiction of these respective Courts. He spent all his
substance in lawyer's fees, in sworn documents, in meeting constant
demands for bribery, the while his kinsman sat comfortably enthroned
at Maries Castle paying no heed to a claim, the justice of which one
attempted to deny yet which no one was able legally to enforce.

Gradually as his pockets grew more and more empty, as constant rebuffs
took the edge off his optimism, Michael carried on the fight with less
and less hope if with unabated doggedness.

In the intervals he had sold his sword and his skin to the highest
bidder, to Italy or Flanders, to the Emperor or to the King of France.
He had led the life of the adventurer, who knows not from day to day
whence will come the rations for the morrow, of the soldier of fortune
who has neither kindred nor home.

His mother whom he adored--in his own turbulent passionate way--spent
a life of humble penury in a remote Kentish village. To this lowly
abode of peace Michael returned from time to time from his far-off
wanderings in Sicily or Spain; here he would spend some few days in
worshipping his mother, until the agony of seeing her patient and
serene within measurable sight of starvation drove him frantic from out
her doors.

Then he would rush back to London and once more haunt the Courts and
the purlieus of Whitehall, swallowing his outbursts of pride in vain
supplications for a fresh hearing, in a mad desire to see the King, in
licking the dust before the feet of those who might help him to further
his cause.

At those times self-deprecation would render him moody; his
pleasure-loving nature was swamped beneath the heavy pall of a mother's
want, a mother's sorrow and misery. He despised himself for being
unable to lift her out of such humiliating penury. She who should
be Countess of Stowmaries, one of the greatest ladies in the land,
scrubbed her own floors and oft lacked a meal, the while her son, the
able-bodied and reckless adventurer, was eating out his heart with the
shame of his own impotence.

But what he could not accomplish whilst the scanty means left to him by
his father were still at his command, he was totally unable to obtain
now that he had not one stiver to offer to those who might have helped
him but whose palms seemed forever to be in want of grease.

Blood-money abroad had also become more meagre. The King of France and
the Emperor had their own standing armies now, and had less need of
mercenary troops than of yore. Michael who in battle sought wounds as
another would seek cheap glory, was given but twenty crowns for a sword
thrust which he received at Fehrbellin whilst fighting for the Elector
of Brandenburg.

He nearly died of the thrust, and afterwards of starvation, for
he sent the twenty crowns to his mother, and being considered too
enfeebled for active service, he could not immediately obtain further
enlistment.

This was but one of the many episodes which had helped to make Michael
Kestyon what he now was. A bitter sense of wrong gnawed at his
heartstrings, the while he strove to hide his better nature beneath the
mask of boisterous gaiety, of a licentious life and reckless gambling.

The buffetings of law officials, the corrupt practises of second rate
attorneys, the constant demands on his scanty purse now made up the sum
total of his dealings with humanity, when he was not actually in the
company of adventurers more profligate, more dissolute than himself.

He saw the better world--that world which was composed of his own
kindred--turned, as if in arms against him. Not a friend to give him
help save at a price which he could not afford to pay. It was money and
always money: money which he could not get, and without which he saw
the last chance of getting a hearing for his case vanishing beyond his
reach.

The descent from those early boyish days full of idealism and of hope,
down to the lowest rung of the social ladder, to the companionship of
gamesters and of drunkards, had been overcertain and none too slow.
Accustomed to the revelries of camp life, to that light-hearted gaiety
so full of exuberance to-day and oft the precursor of a bloody death on
the morrow, Michael found the England of the Restoration a mercenary
and inhospitable spot.

Among his own kind, mockery of his vain endeavours; among the
others--the wastrels--a life of boisterous merrimaking which at any
rate made for forgetfulness.




                             CHAPTER XIII

             My conscience hath a thousand several tongues
             And every tongue brings in a several tale,
             And every tale condemns me for a villain.
                                               --RICHARD III. V. 3.


In response to Ayloffe's whisper, Stowmaries had asked hurriedly:

"Is this the man?"

The older man nodded, and Stowmaries gazed long and searchingly upon
his cousin, vaguely wondering if Sir John's astuteness had pointed in
the right direction, if indeed this were the man most likely to lend
himself for a large sum of money to the furtherance of an ignoble
scheme.

Stowmaries saw before him a man--still in the prime of life but on
whom dissipation, sleeplessness by night and starvation by day had
already boldly writ their impress; a man like unto himself in feature,
a distinct family resemblance being noticeable between the two cousins,
but in Michael Kestyon--the reckless adventurer--the evenly placid
expression born of a contented life had long ago yielded to the wild,
hunted look, the mirror of a turbulent soul. He wore a surcoat which
was obviously of rich cloth though the many vicissitudes of camp life
had left severe imprints upon its once immaculate surface: beneath this
coat there peeped out innocent of vest, the shirt, which once had been
wrought by loving fingers, of fine linen and delicate stitchery, but
now presented the appearance of a miscellaneous collection of tatters
and darns with here and there a dark stain on it, which spoke of more
than one sword thrust in the breast, of the miseries of that life of
fighting and of toil, of aches and pains and of ill-tended wounds.

The rest of Michael's attire was in keeping with the surcoat and the
shirt: the faded silk sash long since deprived of tassels, the collar
free from starch, the breeches a veritable motley of patchwork, and
the high boots of untanned leather, stained a dark greenish brown from
exposure to constant damp.

This then was the man who was most like to sell himself for so much
money, and Stowmaries noting the squalor of Michael's attire, the
dissipated yet wearied look in his face, ceased to wonder how it came
that Sir John had thought of this wastrel, and in his mind fully
approved of the choice.

Suddenly Michael Kestyon caught sight of the two men standing under the
lintel of the door. He greeted them at once with a shout of welcome.

"My worthy coz!" he said gaily, "and if I mistake not 'tis gallant Sir
John Ayloffe, the finest rogue that ever graced a court. Gentlemen!"
he continued mocking, and advancing with mincing and unsteady steps
towards the two men, "pray tell us--though by the Mass I call you
right welcome--what procures this humble abode the honour of such
distinguished company?"

Whilst the young man spoke, most of his companions had ceased both song
and laughter; several faces--all flushed with heady liquor--were turned
towards the door, whilst glances wherein suspicion fought with the
confusing fumes of alcohol, were directed on the newcomers.

But Sir John Ayloffe with determined good humour had returned Michael's
greeting with easy bonhomie.

"Nay, friend Michael," he said, the while he prudently closed the door
behind him and Stowmaries, lest the noise in the coffee room awaken his
sleeping friends, "your amiable cousin and I myself were tired of the
sober assembly in the parlour and had desire for more merry company. I
hope your call of welcome was no mere empty word, and that of a truth
we may join your hospitable board."

With much gravity Michael surveyed Ayloffe and Stowmaries up and down,
from the diamond buckles on their shoes to the elaborate curls of their
gigantic perruques; then he turned to his friends, who had followed his
every movement with that solemn attention peculiar to the drunkard,
which tries yet fails to comprehend what is going on before him.

"What say you, gentlemen?" he said, "shall we admit these noble rogues
to our table? My cousin here, as you see, has but lately emerged from
the surveillance of his keeper, he inhabited a monkey garden for a
considerable time, and hath collected a vast amount of hair on his head
from the shavings of his many companions."

A terrific and prolonged shout of laughter shook the very walls of the
room, the while Stowmaries, who suddenly had became pale with rage,
placed a quivering hand on the hilt of his sword.

"Insolent beggar!--" he murmured in a hoarse voice, which, however, was
completely drowned in the bibulous noise which had greeted Michael's
impertinent sally and which rose and fell in a continuous roar for some
considerable time, the while Michael himself, satisfied at the effect
which he had produced, struck up the refrain of a drinking song.

"In the name of the lady whom you honour with your love, good my
lord," whispered Ayloffe close to Stowmaries' ear and with impressive
earnestness, "I entreat you to keep your temper. We have need of this
wastrel for the success of our scheme, and a quarrel would of a surety
ruin it completely."

Michael Kestyon now turned to his cousin once more.

"I pray you take your seats, gentlemen," he said pointing with unsteady
gesture to a couple of empty chairs placed at the head of the table,
"though you may not be aware of it, my friends here have shown a
desire for the continuance of your presence amongst us. Had they not
desired it they would have shown their disapproval by various hints
more or less gentle, such as the throwing of a pewter mug at you or the
elevation of their toe to the level of your majestic persons. But as it
is ye may rest assured, ye are welcome here."

"I thank you, good Michael," said Ayloffe pleasantly, as in response to
Michael's invitation he now advanced further into the room and took his
seat at the head of the board, followed by Stowmaries who was making
vain attempts to conceal his contempt of the proceedings, and to master
his ill-humour.

"Indeed," continued Sir John addressing with gracious familiarity the
united company present, "I know not what we have done to deserve your
favours. Believe me, we came as suppliants desiring to be entertained
by the most noted merrimakers in London."

Michael with the same mock gravity once more resumed his place at the
table close beside Sir John Ayloffe. He drew two mugs towards him and
from a gigantic pewter jug, he poured out full measures of a thick red
liquid, which had the appearance of spiced wine.

The beverage certainly exhaled a remarkable methylic odour, which from
the nostrils seemed to strike straight into the brain making the blood
seethe in the head and the eyes glow as with the heat of running fire.
Moreover the mugs which Michael had filled, and then pushed towards the
newcomers were not over clean. Even Sir John had much ado to keep his
outward show of geniality and to mask his friend's more and more marked
impatience and disgust.

"By the Mass, merry sirs," quoth Michael with boisterous hilarity, "an
you really desire to be of our company we will grant you admittance.
But first must ye pledge us in a full bumper of this nectar, concocted
by good Master Foorde for the complete undoing of his most favoured
guests. We drink to you, gentlemen, brother rogues an you please. If
you are saints do not drink. The liquid will poison you."

"To you all, brother rogues," came in lusty accents from Sir John
Ayloffe as he jumped to his feet, bumper in hand, "and may you accept
us as two of the worst rogues that ever graced your hospitable board."

He quaffed the sickly, very heady liquid at one draught. He had kept
himself uncommonly sober throughout the evening and the potion he knew
could not do him a great deal of harm. He had a solid head and was not
unused to the rough concoctions made up of cheap wines, of alcohol and
sundry spices wherewith these noisy louts were wont still further to
addle their over-confused pates.

Stowmaries would have demurred, despite the warning look thrown at him
from beneath Sir John's heavy lids, but, looking up, he saw Michael's
deep-set eyes fixed upon him with a measure of amusement not altogether
free from sarcasm which vastly irritated him and without attempting to
hide his disgust he raised the heavy mug with a gesture of recklessness
and contempt and he too drank it down at one draught.

There were loud shouts of approval at this, and the occasion was
further improved by more drinking and the singing of various snatches
culled from the most noted and most licentious songs.

But Michael was now examining Sir John Ayloffe very attentively. The
latter having drunk expressed distinct appreciation of the beverage,
and even made pretence, as he once more resumed his seat, of asking for
more.

"You are looking at me with strange persistence, good Michael," he said
at last with unalterable blandness, as he returned the younger man's
questioning gaze.

"May not a cat look at a king," retorted the other lightly, "or a
beggar gaze on the exalted personality of Sir John Ayloffe?"

"By all means, and welcome. But, on my faith, my personality is in no
wise exalted, therefore, I may be permitted to ask again what is the
cause of your flattering attention?"

"Curiosity," replied Michael curtly.

"Curiosity?"

"Yes. I was wondering in my mind why you are here to-night, and why you
have brought mine estimable if somewhat weak-minded cousin with you
here, in the very midst of the most evil-reputed crowd in London?"

"Oh!" protested Sir John gallantly, "'tis not the most evil-reputed
crowd by any means. We, who are accustomed to the profligate life of
a gentleman, look over leniently on the innocent if somewhat flashy
debaucheries of these pleasure-lovers here."

"Yet are we no mere pleasure lovers, Sir John," said Michael with
a sudden air of seriousness which contrasted strangely with his
flushed face and his slovenly and ragged attire. "You see here before
you the very scum of humanity, the bits of flotsam and jetsam which
the tide of fortune throws upon the shores of life; tattered rags
of manhood, shattered lives, disappointed hopes! This room is full
of these wreckages, like morsels of poisonous seaweed or of empty
shells that litter the earth and make it foul with their noisome
putrefaction. Elegant gentlemen like you and my fair cousin here
should not join in this mêlée wherein crime falls against crime, and
moral foulness pollutes the air. We are rogues here, sir, all of us,"
he added bringing his hand open-palmed crashing down upon the table,
"rogues that have long ago ceased to blush, rogues that shrink neither
before crime nor before shame. Rogues! rogues! all of us--not born so
remember, but made rogues because of some one else's crime, some one
else's shame!--but damned rogues for all that!"

He drank another bumper full of spiced wine! He had spoken loudly and
hoarsely with wrathful eyes gazing straight ahead before him, as if
striving through the foul smoke and vitiated air of this den of thieves
to perceive that nook in a Kentish village, where in a tumble-down,
miserable cottage, a woman who should have been Countess of Stowmaries
was often on her knees scrubbing the tiled floors.

But Stowmaries's laugh, loud and almost malignant, broke the trend of
Michael's thoughts.

"Ay, ay! Well said!" he shouted as loudly, as hilariously as had done
the others. "Well said, Michael, for you at least, an rumour doth not
lie, are a damned rogue for all that!"

"Nay! Nay!" interposed Ayloffe with mild amiability, "you do your
cousin Michael a grave injustice. I know that my lord of Rochester
would back me up in what I say. All these gentlemen here are rogues but
in name. They shout and they sing, they parade the streets and make
merry, but they are, of a truth, of a right good sort, and if only a
pleasing turn of fortune came their way, they would all become peaceful
citizens in a trice and forswear all their deeds of profligacy, of
which they are often cordially ashamed."

'Twas Michael's turn to laugh. He threw back his head so that the
muscles of his neck stood out like cords, and he laughed loudly and
immoderately, with a laugh that had absolutely no mirth in it.

"Ashamed of our roguery," he said at last, when that outburst had
ceased and he was once more learning forward across the table with
dark, glowing eyes wandering from one flushed face to another. "Hark at
him, gentlemen! Sir John Ayloffe here would make saints of us! Hark ye,
sir," he continued bringing his excited face close to that of Sir John,
"I for one delight in mine own roguery. I am what I am, do you hear?
what the buffetings of Fate and the injustice of man have made me. The
more my mealy-mouthed cousin here exults in his courtliness and in his
honour, the more do I glory in mine own disgrace. If _that_ is honour,"
he said pointing with a trembling hand at Stowmaries who despite his
brave attire cut but a sorry figure at the present moment, for he felt
supremely ill at ease, "then am I content to be a rogue. The greater
the villainy, the prouder am I to accomplish it, and if I am to go to
Hell for it, then let my damnation be on the head of those who have
driven me thither."

Stowmaries shrugged his shoulders in moody contempt. Sir John looked
like one profoundly impressed at an unforeseen aspect of affairs.

"As for me," growled one of the men sulkily, "pay me for it and I'll
stick a knife into any person you list."

He was an elderly man with a red face and straggly white hair. He had
been a scholar once, drunkenness and an inordinate love of gambling had
made him what he now was.

"For ten golden sovereigns I'd poison the King!" quoth another thickly.

"For less than that I'd sell my soul!" added another.

"Thou canst not sell what thou hast not got," comes in a quick reply
from the further end of the table.

"And you, friend Michael, what would you do for a fortune?" asked Sir
John returning Michael's gaze with a firm, earnest look.

"I'd ask the devil to spare my cousin here!" replied Michael flippantly.

"You would not play the part of an hired assassin, I am sure."

"If I hated any one well enough, I'd kill him without pay," retorted
the other.

"Or abduct a woman?"

"An she pleased me, I'd not want money to tell her so."

"Then meseems," sighed Sir John with a deprecating shrug of the
shoulders, "that I have come to the wrong man with mine offer."

"There was no offer," quoth Michael curtly.

"Ay! of a fortune," rejoined the other calmly.

"Not a serious one."

"As serious as mine own presence here."

"You have come here prepared to make me an offer?" reiterated the
young man now, with contemptuous incredulity.

"The offer of a fortune," reiterated Ayloffe quietly.

"How much?"

"One hundred and twenty thousand pounds."

"One hundred--"

"And twenty thousand pounds," repeated Sir John with slow emphasis.

"Bah!--'tis a stupid and a purposeless lie!"

And Michael striving to look indifferent leaned back in his chair, then
fell forward again with elbows resting heavily on the table the while
his eyes glowing with the excitement of heady liquor and the vague
suggestion only half expressed searched the face of the older man.

"Who would give a ne'er-do-well one hundred and twenty thousand
pounds?" he reiterated in an unsteady voice, "and for what purpose? Are
you fooling me, Sir John?"

"On my solemn word of honour, no!" asserted the latter calmly.

"Then for what purpose?" repeated Michael, whilst a sneer which looked
almost evil for a moment quite distorted his face. "Am I to murder some
offending stranger in the dark? bribe the King's physician to poison
him, or turn informant against my cousin's co-religionists in England
as is the fashion nowadays? Well! tell me what it is? Have I not told
you that I am rogue enough to accomplish mine own damnation--at a
price."

"My good Michael, you mistake my meaning. I propose no roguery unworthy
a gentleman. An you'll accept my offer you'd have no cause to regret
it, for you'd be a rich, happy and contented man to the last day of
your life."

"An it were so simple as that, man," quoth Michael drily, "you'd have
no need to offer a fortune to a rogue in order to get what you want. As
for the rest, methinks that most rogueries are unworthy a gentleman.
But then you see I am no gentleman, else I were not here now, and
probably had long ere this flung my glove in your face. So out with
it--you offer me one hundred and twenty thousand pounds--for what?"

Instinctively for the last five minutes or so as their conversation
drew into more serious channels, the two men had gradually dropped
their voices, speaking almost in a whisper. They had drawn their chairs
closely together to the corner of the table, with Lord Stowmaries
between them, silent and attentive.

Sir John at this stage was sitting close to the end of the table, the
full length of which stretched out on his right. He raised his head now
and gave a quick glance at the rest of the assembly.

Those of the revellers who were not wholly incapable, either sprawling
across the table, or lying prone upon the floor, had drawn up their
chairs in groups. The rattle of dice in boxes was distinctly audible
above the snoring of the sleepers, also muttered curses from the
gamblers who were losing and the clink of brass money passing from hand
to hand. Satisfied that the attention of the company had long since
wandered away from himself and Michael, he once more turned to the
young man and said quietly in response to that impatient: "For what?"

"For marrying the pretty daughter of an amiable Paris bourgeois, the
wench being over-ready to fall into your arms."

Michael made no movement but he studied Sir John's face, as if he
thought that the man was not completely sane, or had succumbed to the
fumes of spiced wine.

"I do not understand," he murmured quite bewildered.

"Must I repeat my words?" said Sir John imperturbably. "There is a
wench over in Paris, as pure and good as the day on which she lisped
her first Ave Maria at her mother's knee. For certain simple reasons
which you will hear anon, a husband must be found for her within the
next fourteen days. An you'll be that happy man there will be fifty
thousand pounds for you as soon as you agree to the bargain, and
seventy more on the day that you bring home the bride."

"Yes! that sounds simple enough. But now tell me the hitch."

"The hitch?"

"Yes. The hitch which forces you to ask a blackguard like myself to
do the work for you. Why do you not become the happy man yourself for
instance?"

"Oh! I am not young enough, nor yet well-favoured. The first fifty
thousand pounds will help to make of you the most dashing gallant in
the two kingdoms."

"But why a blackguard?" persisted Michael with cutting sarcasm. He felt
agitated, even strangely excited. He was shrewd enough to see that Sir
John was not fooling him, that there was more than a mere undercurrent
of seriousness in this extraordinary offer made across this common
supper table. His fingers were beating an incessant tattoo upon the
boards, and his eyes restless, keen as those of a wild beast scenting a
trap, searched the face of his interlocutor.

"Why a blackguard if the wench is a saint as you say, why a
blackguard?" he insisted.

"A blackguard? Perish the thought!" said Sir John lightly. "Nay!
the reason why your personality commended itself to me and to my
lord of Stowmaries was because you are a gentleman, despite the many
vicissitudes of an adverse Fate, and that you would render the girl
happy and proud to be your wife."

"Ah! my worthy cousin is a party to this game?" queried Michael with a
sneer.

"In Heaven's name, man," he added with almost savage impatience, "why
cannot you speak up like a man? Cards on the table, by the Mass, or my
hand will come in contact with your mealy mouth--"

He checked himself, angry at his own outburst of rage which he had been
unable to control.

"Have I not said that I am on my way to Hell," he added more quietly,
"why should you hesitate to show me a short cut?"

"Cards on the table, friend Michael, since you'll have it so," now
said Ayloffe in a quiet impressive whisper, "bear that one hundred and
twenty thousand pounds in your mind all the while you listen to me.
The wench over in Paris was made to go through a marriage ceremony
with your cousin here, eighteen years ago, when she was a babe in arms
and he a mere lad, unable to defend himself against this encroachment
on his future liberty. Since then my lord of Stowmaries has never met
his bride, nor did her parents--worthy yet mercenary tradespeople of
Paris--desire him to see their daughter. He was poor Rupert Kestyon
then, an undesirable son-in-law if ever there was one: they would
have broken the marriage then, only the Church would not allow it.
Then my lord became what he now is, rich, influential, desirable, and
promptly the Paris shopkeepers changed their tactics. They demanded
that your cousin shall acknowledge and take to his heart and home a
woman whom he has never seen, whom he can never love; for the affection
of his heart, of his whole manhood is pledged to another whom he
adores. In his despair my lord hath come to me and I am proud to be
his friend. I would help him to regain that liberty which an untoward
Fate hath fettered. Is not my lord a wholly innocent victim? He did
not ask to wed--for long he was spurned as one unworthy. Now because
he is rich, he is to be made the tool of rapacious bourgeois, who
would see their daughter Countess of Stowmaries. They have invoked
the aid of the Church who spurred by their gold hath threatened
anathema and excommunication on my lord. The King--sorely inclined to
Catholicism--will not hear of breaking marriage vows which he calls
solemn, and which under such circumstances sensible men cannot fail to
call a farce. My lord hath come to me and I have thought of a scheme--"

So far Michael had listened with unswerving attention to this long
exposé delivered by Sir John in clear, even voice that was hardly
raised above a whisper. He had listened, his head resting in his right
hand, his left lying clenched and motionless on the table. But now he
interrupted Ayloffe's placid flow of eloquence.

"You need not tell me your scheme, man," he said, "I have guessed it
already. I know now why you had need of a rogue for the furtherance
of your project. I, Michael Kestyon, am to go to Paris and there
impersonate my love-sick cousin, carry away the bride by that
trick, and thus forever so shame her, that a dissolution of that
child-marriage will readily be granted by Church and State."

"And that for the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds, friend
Michael! one hundred and twenty thousand pounds--a fortune that would
tempt a King!" added Sir John earnestly.

Michael made no comment, and there was thus an instant's silence at
this end of the table where sat the three men: only a second or two
mayhap during which a blasphemous oath uttered at the further end of
the room seemed in some strange and occult way to mark the descent of a
soul one step further down on its way to Hell. One instant during which
the tempter watched the tempted, and from the giddy heights of future
satisfied ambition showed him the world conquered at the paltry price
of momentary dishonour.

One fitful ray of a ghoulish moon searched, through a narrow slit
between swishing curtains, the fleshy face of Ayloffe, the descendant
of the Hebrew bondswoman; the thickly-lidded eyes fixed like those of
some poison-giving reptile upon the trapped victim. It played weird and
ghost-like upon the dull scarlet of his cloak, and made strange shadows
beneath his heavy brows, giving him an eerie, satanic expression, which
Stowmaries--whose brain was on fire--was quick to note.

He shuddered and instinctively drew away. But Michael Keyston who had
not stirred a muscle, who had scarce breathed during that moment's
solemn pause, now leaned forward and said quietly:

"For the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds, I will do what
you wish."

Then noting that the look of satisfaction on Stowmaries' face was not
wholly unmixed with contempt, he added with a quick return to his
flippant mood:

"Nay, Cousin, look not so loftily from adown the giddy heights of
supposed integrity. 'Tis useless at this stage to despise the hand
that will help you in your need. Methinks that my share in the intrigue
is no more unavowable than your own. 'Tis you are married to the lady
and owe her protection, yet you offer money to further treachery
against her. Now I have never seen the wench and am no traitor to
her since I do not know her. I owe her no allegiance; she is but one
woman out of a million to me. Have you never tried to win a woman by
trickery, good Coz?"

He spoke lightly, even gaily, only Sir John--the keen observer of his
fellowmen--noted that the laugh which accompanied this tirade had a
hollow ring in it, also that Michael after he had spoken drank down one
after another two large goblets full of wine.

"Do not let us split hairs, gentlemen, over the meaning of a word,"
said Ayloffe pleasantly. "Friend Michael, my hand on it. I devised
the scheme, and confess that my thoughts flew to you for its
accomplishment." He put out his hand, but Michael seemed to ignore
the gesture. With a shrug of the shoulders indicating good-tempered
toleration, the other continued glibly, "Let us own to it, gentlemen,
we are all rogues, every one of us here present; I, who made the
proposal, my lord of Stowmaries who pays the piper, and Michael who
takes a fortune in exchange for a trick. Bah, gentlemen, 'tis but a
merry jest, and, on my honour, no harm can come to any one. Is not
Michael Kestyon henceforth rich, as well as highly-connected and
amiable of mien. By Gad the practised hand of his future father-in-law
together with that of a court barber, would soon turn him into the most
gallant gentleman in the two kingdoms."

"A truce on this nonsense," interposed Michael with a quick return to
his impatient mood. "Tell me what you expect me to do, and I'll do it;
but there's no cause for such empty talk. I am being paid to act and
not to listen."

"We'll be serious, old sobersides," quoth Sir John with imperturbable
good humour, "and think of the best schemes to bring our scheme to a
successful issue. My lord of Stowmaries, have I your leave to place the
details of our plan before our friend here?"

Scarce waiting for the impatient assent of the other, Ayloffe
continued, speaking directly to Michael:

"Firstly, then: to-morrow as soon as the shopkeepers have taken down
their shutters you shall go to the King's tailor in Holborn and there
order yourself various suits of clothes, befitting the many occasions
when you shall have need of them in Paris and on your honeymoon. Once
the bargain sealed between us, by word of honour as between gentlemen,
your gracious cousin will place fifty thousand pounds in your hands.
You will be a rich man to-morrow, friend Michael, and can attire
yourself in accordance with your whim. From the tailor's in Holborn you
had best proceed to the barber's in Fleet Street, who will provide you
with the most fashionable perruques--"

"I know all that, man," interrupted Michael with ever-growing
impatience. "I know that the monkey hath to be tricked out for parade.
When I have been made to look like a fool in motley garb, what further
shall I do?"

"You'll hie over to France as soon as may be; for already at break of
day to-morrow you--in your temporary name of Earl of Stowmaries--will
write a letter to M. Legros, merchant tailor of Paris apprising him of
your intentions no longer to disobey the decrees of the Church, or the
dictates of your own heart, which of a truth has ever been true to your
baby bride; also you will tell him of your desire to proceed forthwith
to Paris in order to claim your wife, to have the marriage ceremony of
eighteen years ago formally ratified and finally to bring her back in
state and solemnity to her new home in England."

"Am I to write all these lies myself?" asked Michael.

"Nay! I'll constitute myself your secretary," replied Ayloffe, "you
need only to sign 'Stowmaries.' As I mistake not, 'tis a name you would
gladly sign always, 'twill not come amiss for once. You may have to
sign papers over there, 'twere better that your handwriting be known at
once."

"When do I start for Paris?"

"What say you to a fortnight's hence from this day? 'Twill give you
ample time for the completion of your toilet. An you will allow me
I will provide you with a retinue worthy of your rank. It must be
composed of men whom we can trust, and men who do not know my lord of
Stowmaries by sight and are not like to guess that something is amiss.
Three will be sufficient. I will engage them at the last, so that there
may be no fear of our secret reaching their knowledge."

"Clothes, men, money," quoth Michael, "methinks, Sir John, you have
thought of everything. Once I am in Paris?"

"You will act as judgment guides you."

"And no doubt seventy thousand pounds is a good guide to judgment."

Michael's somewhat defiant manner seemed completely to have vanished.
He appeared to be yielding himself quite freely to the delights of
the promised adventure; at least this was what good Sir John hoped
whilst congratulating himself on the remarkable attainment of his
fondly-cherished desire.

But remember that this same good Sir John was no superficial observer
of human nature. He was not altogether deceived by Michael's outward
show of flippancy. That excitement had got hold of the adventurer's
imagination was undoubted and probably the obstinacy of an untamed
nature would prevent his drawing back from a promise once given.

At the same time the glint of excitement in Michael's eyes had but
little genuine merriment in it. It was more like the unnatural fire
produced by fever-heated blood.

It was the money which had tempted Michael--so concluded Ayloffe in
his own mind. The money which mayhap would help the claimant to bring
forward his cause once again into the light of day. Money which would
mean bribes, high enough to tempt corrupt judges or even--who knows--a
pleasure-loving King.

What Michael thought of the adventure itself, what it cost him to
acquiesce in it with an outward show of careless gaiety even the astute
Sir John could not have said: he himself had achieved his own ends and
personally he cared little what Michael felt so long as the young man
fulfilled his share of the ignoble contract.

Was it so ignoble after all? Sir John with a smile of self-contempt
found himself wondering in his mind whether any one would indeed be
the loser by it. Stowmaries? certainly not!--he could well afford
to pay twice a hundred thousand pounds for the gratification of his
most ardent desire: his freedom to marry the woman whom he loved.
Michael?--of a truth Michael would lose a little more self-respect than
he had already done, but then he must have so little left--and he would
become passing rich.

As for the tailor's wench, bah!--one husband was as good as another,
concluded Sir John with a splendid cynicism, and if Michael Kestyon
was not actually Earl of Stowmaries, by Gad he was mighty near to it,
and--who knows?--with one hundred and twenty thousand pounds in his
pocket might yet oust his cousin from that enviable state.

And he--Sir John Ayloffe--gambler on his beam ends, would henceforth
look forward to a comfortable old age with Mistress Julia Peyton's
twelve thousand pounds carefully placed at interest so that there might
be no temptation to dribble it away.

All was for the best in the best possible world!




                              CHAPTER XIV

                  Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
                                                --MACBETH IV. 1.


But there was one more card which Ayloffe, the gambler, desired to play
ere he lost sight momentarily of the man who was to be his tool in the
carving of their respective fortunes.

He now rose from the table and went up to the door which gave on
the private parlour. This he opened and looked in. Just as he had
anticipated, there was but little change in the attitude of the three
gentlemen whom he had left in the room.

Sir Anthony Wykeham still sat moodily leaning back in his chair, a
shade more confused in his brain than he had been before, his eyes
more shifty and uncertain in expression. A couple of empty bottles in
front of him mutely explained the reason for this gradual change in the
emphatic moraliser of a while ago.

Sir Knaith Bullock was still lying on the floor, in the midst of the
straw which with idle hands he had gradually heaped up all round him,
so that he seemed reclining in a nest. But he was not asleep now; he
was singing chorus to the songs of my lord Rochester, who--frankly
tipsy--made as much noise and sang as thoroughly out of tune as any of
the plebeian revellers in the coffee room.

"Hello, Sir John!" he shouted lustily, "where in the devil's name have
you and Stowmaries been hiding yourselves?"

His tongue was thick and the words fell inarticulately from his
quivering lips. Sir Knaith Bullock rolled over in the straw in order to
have a good view of the intruder.

"Where the devil--sh--sh--Stowmaries?" he babbled as incoherently as
his friend.

"We have been busy finding an alternative husband for the tailor's
daughter," said Sir John gaily.

"And have you found one?" queried Wykeham with vague, somnolent eyes
fixed upon the speaker.

"Ay! that we have! And I pray you gentlemen to join the merry company
in the coffee room and to pledge the bold adventurer in a monster
goblet of wine."

"Egad!--you--you don't mean--that--hic!--" hiccupped Bullock who had
rolled right over in the straw and now looked like a giant and frowzy
dog with prickly wisps standing out of his perruque and sticking to his
surcoat and velvet breeches. He contrived to work himself about until
he got onto his feet, whereupon he stood there tottering and swaying
the while his bleary eyes tried to take in what was going on around him.

A great shout issuing from the coffee room, great banging of mugs
against the boards, loud laughter and the first verse of a song, roused
Rochester from his apathy and Wykeham from his moodiness.

"They are passing roisterous over there!" remarked the latter, gazing
covetously toward the open door.

"They are toasting the gallant adventurer," said Sir John; "I pray
you, gentlemen, come and join us. Let us drink to the future husband
of the tailor's daughter, the future possessor of one hundred and
twenty thousand pounds in solid cash and of my lord Stowmaries' eternal
gratitude. Let us drink to Michael Kestyon."

"Michael--Kesh--Keshtyon is it?" babbled Sir Knaith.

"The damned blackguard--" murmured Wykeham.

"I say hurrah for Michael Kestyon!" roared my lord Rochester lustily,
"the beggar hath pluck. By Gad! won't old Rowley laugh at the
adventure? Would I'd had the impudence to go through with it myself!--I
say hurrah for Michael Kestyon!"

He lurched forward in the wake of Sir John who had once more turned
towards the coffee room, and closely followed by the others, all four
men shouting: "Hurrah for Michael Kestyon! Hurrah for the tailor's
daughter!"

Their advent was greeted by more vigorous shouting, more singing and
cries of: "Hurrah!" which issued from out the darkness. For by now only
one last tallow candle was left spluttering and dripping, its feeble
yellow rays illumining but one narrow circle of light wherein the
remnant of a pie, an overturned bottle and a pool of red wine, stood
out as the sole objects actually visible in the room.

In this total darkness, the noise of hoarse shouts, of cries for
"Michael Kestyon!" of blasphemies and of oaths sounded weird and
satanic, like a babel of ghouls exulting in the realms of the night.

Sir John paused at the door. He had wished to see Michael Kestyon
commit himself finally before these other three gentlemen, who were
almost partners in the conspiracy. He wanted to see the bond sealed
with the word of honour of the rogue who--as Ayloffe well knew--would
never break a pledge once given.

Therefore, he called loudly to Michael, and listened for the cheery
tones of his voice. But no response came, only from out the gloom a
curt answer from Stowmaries:

"Oh! 'tis no use calling for Michael! He hath gone!"




                              CHAPTER XV

              Still his soul fed upon the sovereign hour
              That had been or that should be:
                                                      --SWINBURNE.


Michael in the meanwhile was running through the deserted streets like
a man possessed. Cloakless and hatless he ran, bending his head to the
gusts of wind which tore down the narrow byways in the neighbourhood of
the Strand.

Fitful clouds chased one another over his head, obscuring the moon, and
from time to time descending in sharp showers of icy rain.

But Michael loved the wind and cared naught for the wet. The rags he
wore were soon soaked through, but he did not attempt to take shelter
beneath the various yawning archways which he passed from time to time;
on the contrary he liked the cold douches of these winter showers which
seemed to cool his head, burning with inward fever.

Michael Kestyon, the gambler, the adventurer, the wastrel, had begun
the fight against his own soul.

For the space of a few seconds, there in the over-heated tavern room
in the midst of all those drunkards, those profligates--scums of
humanity--dying honour had called out in its agony: "Wilt sell me for
gold?" but Michael had laughed out loud and long, and smothered those
warning cries with the recklessness of the soldier of fortune who
stakes his all on the winning card.

His claim, his rights! His and those of that patient old soul dying of
want in a lonely cottage, the while she should be living in the lap of
luxury and of ease.

She was dying of want, of actual hard, bitter starvation. Michael knew
it and could do naught to help, and in the midst of the dissolute life
of the town had vainly striven to forget that even at the cost of his
life's blood, which he would have given gladly drop by drop, he could
not purchase for her a soft bed on which she would finally go to her
eternal sleep.

His claim! His rights! Her happiness! The happiness of the one being
in the whole wide world who had clung to him, who loved him for what
he was and did not despise him for what he had become: this he could
purchase for one hundred and twenty thousand pounds.

Had not Sir John Ayloffe himself said that 'twas a fortune which would
tempt a king.

The lawyers had told Michael that only money was wanted to bring his
claim before the Lords' House of Parliament now, and once publicly
debated, justice could not stand against it.

Michael had oft laughed at those two words, "Only money!"

Only money! and when he sought and got a sword thrust that nearly
killed him, he was given twenty crowns as blood-money. He reckoned at
this rate that his miserable body would have to be as full of holes as
a sieve, before he obtained enough money wherewith to satisfy the first
lawyer who would condescend once more to take up his case.

But now all that--lawyers' fees, fees for a first hearing, for a
second and for a third, for pleadings, interrogatories and affidavits,
for petitions to the King and for briberies to obtain a private
audience--all that would be within his reach.

The price? A woman's honour and his own self-respect.

Once--very long ago, these would have mattered to him a great deal; in
those days he had believed in men's honour and in women's virtue.

But now? He had lost so much self-respect already--what mattered if a
few more shreds of it went the way of all his other ideals.

He had once boldly said that he would give his life's blood drop by
drop, endure every agony, undergo every torture to see his mother
installed at Maries Castle, her rightful and proper place.

Well, that had been easy to say! These things were not asked of him,
and he had gone through so much, suffered often so terribly from
hunger, wounds and fatigue that the sacrifice of his life or the
endurance of most bitter tortures would have been an easy sacrifice.
He was hard and tough--what nerves he had had been jarred beyond all
sensibility long ago.

But now something was asked of him. Fate had spoken in no uncertain
accents. She had said: "Make a sacrifice of thine honour, and thy most
cherished wish will be gratified!"

If those former bold words--offers of blood and life--were not the talk
of a weak-kneed braggart, then, Michael Kestyon, thou shouldst not
hesitate!

Dost prize those paltry remnants of self-respect so highly that thou
wouldst see thy mother starve ere thou sell them?

Starve, remember, starve!--in the direct, absolute, unmitigated sense
of the word. If thou canst not provide her with the necessities of
life, she must starve sooner or later, in a month, in a year, in two
mayhap, that would depend how charitably inclined the neighbours
happened to be. But starve she must, if thou, her son, dost naught for
her.

And Fate had whispered: "Money, power, justice await thee, at the price
of thy self-respect and the honour of a woman who is a stranger to
thee."

The subtle temptation had entered into Michael's heart like an
insinuating poison which killed every objection, every argument, every
moral rebellion in his soul. And the temptation assailed him just at
this time when his whole being ached with the constant buffetings
of life, when he longed with all the maddening strength of defiant
impotence to hit right and left at the world which had derided him, to
begin again a new life of action, of combat, of lofty aspirations.

Try and pity him, for the temptation was over-great; pity him
because Fate had struck him one blow after another, each more and
more difficult to bear since his soul, his mind, his entire self had
scarcely time to recover from one before the next came crashing down,
leaving him with one hope the less, one more ideal shattered, one more
misery to bear.

One hundred and twenty thousand pounds!--Michael kept repeating the
half dozen wonderful words to himself over and over again as he walked.

Thus tottering, buffeted by the wind, drunk with the magic of the
thought which the words evoked, he reached his lodgings at last.

He rapped loudly at a low door with his knuckles, but had to wait some
time before it was opened. A gnome-like figure wrapped in a tattered
dressing gown and wearing a cotton night-cap appeared in the doorway.
It was difficult to distinguish if the figure was that of man or woman.
In brown and wrinkled hands it held a guttering tallow dip which threw
a trembling light on the dank walls of the narrow passage and feebly
illumined the approach to the rickety stairs beyond.

Michael paid no heed to the muttered grumblings of the creature, but
walked straight past it along the passage, and then up the creaky
stairs which led to the garret above. As he reached the several
landings he nearly fell over various prostrate bundles made up of human
rags from out of which issued sleepy oaths, as Michael's foot stumbled
against them.

His own garret was not much better than those open landings across
which he had tottered and fumbled in the dark. Here the roof sloped
down to the tiny dormer window, innocent of curtains, and made up of
some half dozen tiny panes, mostly cracked and covered with thick
coatings of grime.

Along the low wall opposite the window a row of ragged bundles--human
only in shape--and similar to those which encumbered the landings, told
their tale of misery and of degradation. There were some half dozen of
these bundles lying all of a row against the wall. They were Michael's
room companions, the wreckages of man and womankind, with whom he had
lived now for close on eighteen months.

Snores and drunken oaths, blasphemy too and noisome words spoken in
sleep came from these bundles, greeting Michael's somewhat stormy
entrance into this den.

He shut the rickety door behind him, and made his way to the little
window, through which the light of some street lanthorn opposite came
shyly peeping through.

Michael threw the casement open, allowing that feeble light to enter
more fully, then he turned and surveyed his surroundings,--those
bundles along the floor, the wooden boards across which a crowd of
vermin were scrampering out of sight, the two chairs, innocent of
seats, the wooden packing case in lieu of table, the walls dank and
grey, covered with obscene writing scribbled with shaky fingers dipped
in grime!

Michael looked at it all, as if he had never seen it before. In an
angle of the room was the straw paillasse still empty which awaited
him, and around which the dying instincts of gentle birth had caused
him to erect a kind of unseen barrier between that corner and the rest
of the room. Here the floor was clean, the straw was fresh; above the
paillasse the wall had been carefully wiped clean and rubbed over with
lime, and on an overturned wooden case beside the miserable bed there
were one or two books, and a small metal crucifix which profane fingers
had apparently never dared to touch.

But these very trifling attempts at cleanliness were the only luxury
which had come within Michael's reach, ever since he came home from
that last campaign in Brandenburg and sent his last crown to his mother
in Kent. And remember that such garrets, such degrading propinquity,
such misery and such dirt represented the only kind of life which
London offered in those days to the poor, to the outcast and the
homeless. There was nothing else except the gutter itself.

Michael stood in the centre of this garret and looked upon the
picture--his life! His life such as it had been for the past eighteen
months, such as it would continue to be until he became too old and
too feeble to drag himself up from that straw paillasse in the corner.
Then he would lie there sick and starving until he was taken away feet
foremost down the rickety stairway to the paupers' graveyard out beyond
St. Paul's.

With arms akimbo, hands resting on his hips and feet firmly planted
on the dust-covered floor, Michael looked and laughed; not bitterly
or mirthlessly. Bitterness had gone--strangely enough--at sight of
the picture. He laughed, mocking himself for the few scruples which
had assailed him awhile ago, for having conjured up--yes! conjured up
himself--those phantoms of honour which accused him of selling his
self-respect.

Was this self-respect, this den of rogues, this herd of miserable
ne'er-do-wells, these filthy walls, this life of misery, of
wretchedness, of shifts--growing day by day more unavowable for
obtaining bread for the morrow? Was this manhood to stand against such
odds? Was this honour to endure such a life?

Bah! if it was, then far better sell it for the price of oak boards
sufficient to make two coffins: one for the man, the other for the old
woman living the same life and enduring the same misery.

Michael turned back to the window and with a brusque, impatient gesture
tore open the second casement. A gust of wind found its way into the
musty corners of the garret and scattered the vitiated air, the while
the moon emerging triumphantly from her long imprisonment behind the
clouds searched with bluish and ghostly rays the grey walls opposite,
the drunken sleepers on the floor, the vermin scuttling between those
litters of straw more fit for cattle than for human beings.

The blustering wind, as it tore at the rickety casements roused some of
the sleepers from their dreams. Volleys of oaths were flung at Michael,
but he heard nothing now. He leaned out of the narrow window--as far
out as he could--and looked on the forest of chimney stacks, the
irregular roofs and tall spires of this great and heartless city.

How peacefully she lay beneath the cool kiss of the moon! Invisible
arms seemed to be stretched out toward the lonely watcher bidding him
to come and conquer.

There was no longer any compunction in Michael's heart, and certainly
no shame.

"I am a man," he said speaking to those unseen shadows, "and what I do,
I do!"

The freshness of the air came as a bath of moral cleanliness to his
soul; he felt an excitement, too, akin to that of a war horse when
scenting the coming battle. To Michael now the whole transaction--to
which on the morrow he would affix the seal of his pledged word--was
but a mighty combat wherein a powerful weapon would be placed in his
hand.

He would at last be able to hit right and left, to be even with that
world which had buffeted him, which had scorned his efforts, but
allowed his mother to starve.

Aye! He was a turbulent soul; a soul created to fight and not to endure.

And if at moments during that lonely watch above the chimney stacks and
roofs of London there came floating to his mind the thought of the girl
who was nothing to him, the stranger whom he would so bitterly wrong,
then with a proud toss of the head, a joy which literally lighted
up his whole being, he would send an unspoken challenge up to those
swiftly-flying clouds which tended southwards, towards Paris.

"Go tell her!" he murmured, "that whoever she may be Michael Kestyon
will serve her with gratitude and love all the days of his life. On
his knees will he worship her, and devote his life to her happiness.
And," he added mentally, whilst a quiver of excitement shook his broad
shoulders, "tell her that an she desires to be Countess of Stowmaries,
even that desire Michael Kestyon will gratify, for he will make her
that--tell her--tell her that before next December's snows cover the
earth there will be two Countesses of Stowmaries in England: Michael
Kestyon's mother and Michael Kestyon's wife."

He did not attempt to go and rest on his miserable couch, but leant
for hours up against the window watching the moon slowly drawing its
peaceful course along the dark firmament, seeing the fleecy, silvered
clouds fly madly across the sky, lashed by the wind into fantastic
shapes of witches' heads and of lurid beasts. He watched the roofs
and towers of many churches as gradually they were wrapped in the
mist-laden mantle of approaching dawn.

He watched until far away above chimney stacks and pointed steeples
a feeble rosy glow precursed the rising sun. He was too weary now to
think any more, too weary to dream, too weary he thought even to live.

And through the gathering mist it seemed to him that the ghostly
spectres of his tumultuous past came to him enwrapped in white palls,
monstrous and majestic, towering above mighty London, and that walking
slowly in their wake, tottering and shy was his mother, enfeebled by
starvation and the wretchedness of her life. She held out emaciated
arms to him in a mute appeal for help, whilst the ghosts of the past
spoke with unseen lips of all that he had suffered, of the great
sorrows and the tiny pin-pricks.

And with every word they uttered his soul sank more and more to rest,
and even as his aching head sank down upon his outstretched arms, and
his eyes closed in a dreamless sleep, his lips murmured with final
defiance:

"I am a man! and what I do, I do."




                              CHAPTER XVI

             Now mark! To be precise--Though
             I say "lies," all these, at this first stage
             'Tis but for science' sake.
                                                    --BROWNING.


In the meanwhile my lord of Stowmaries had been allowed to spend a
happy hour in the tiny withdrawing room at Holborn Row, kneeling at
Mistress Julia Peyton's feet.

He had been so excited, so full of Sir John's proposals and their
more than probable success that like Michael Kestyon he had no desire
for rest. He had soon wearied of the crowd in the coffee room, and
presently had allowed Ayloffe to lead him out into the streets.

Instinctively his footsteps turned in the direction of Holborn Row, the
while he lent a somewhat inattentive ear to what Sir John was saying to
him. Ayloffe was talking of the details of his scheme; of the payment
of the money to Michael on the morrow, if the latter finally pledged
himself to the bargain; fifty thousand pounds then, and a further
seventy on the day that the tailor's daughter left her home in her
husband's company.

"We must be as good as our word, my lord," said the astute Sir John.
"A word misplaced, the faintest suggestion of withdrawal on any point
might upset Michael's curious temper and turn his acquiescence into
obstinate refusal."

Ayloffe had no doubt of Stowmaries' integrity, only the sum was such a
vast one--and the worthy baronet was so unaccustomed to the handling
of thousands--that he could not help dreading the fact that the young
man had mayhap overestimated his power of paying away such large sums
at such short intervals, and that, when the time came for disbursement,
a hitch might occur which would rouse Michael's antagonism and upset
the perfectly-laid scheme once and for all.

Stowmaries, however, seemed to attach very slight importance to this
question of money.

"I am a man of my word," he said curtly. "I have no wish to draw back.
What I've said, I've said."

What cared he if it cost him twice one hundred thousand pounds, if
indeed he were free to wed the beautiful Julia?

He was over-eager to be at her feet now and showed marked impatience to
rid himself of Ayloffe's company.

"My hand on it, Sir John," he said, halting at the corner of Holborn
Row, for he did not want the older man to see whither he was going, the
while the latter was well aware that my lord was on his way to Mistress
Peyton's house. "My hand on it; and to-morrow Michael Kestyon shall
have his fifty thousand pounds, if he finally agrees to do what we
want."

"This he must do in the presence of witnesses--my lord of Rochester or
Sir Knaith Bullock would favour us as much. Yet have I no fear that the
rogue will play us false, 'tis the money he wants, and fifty thousand
were not enough to tempt him; 'tis that further seventy that he'll
crave for most."

"I know, I know," said Stowmaries, impatiently anxious to get away, now
that he had perceived--as he thought--a light in one of the windows
of his fair Julia's house. "He shall have that, too. The money is at
interest with Master Vivish the diamond merchant. I can get it at any
time."

"We promised it to Michael on the day that the tailor's daughter leaves
her father's home," urged the over-prudent Sir John.

"On that day he shall have it," rejoined the other.

"Then your lordship would have to journey to France in order to fulfil
that promise."

"I'll to France then," retorted the young man who had come to the end
of his tether, "an you'll go to Hell now and leave me in peace."

Ayloffe laughed good-humouredly. Usually prone to quarrel he was
determined to keep his temper to-night; and as he felt that nothing
further would be gained now by talking whilst Stowmaries was so
obviously waiting to be rid of him, he said nothing more, but gave his
friend a cordial Good-night and turned on his heel in the direction of
Lincoln's Inn Fields.

Stowmaries--as soon as the other was out of sight--walked down Holborn
Row, and had soon reached the familiar door.

In response to his loud knocking the East Anglian serving-man came to
open it. With the stolidity peculiar to his race, he showed no surprise
at the untimely visitor, and with solemn imperturbability held out his
furrowed hand even before Stowmaries had produced the small piece of
silver which alone would induce the old man to permit that visitor to
enter.

The piece of silver being deemed sufficient to overcome the man's
scruples, he shuffled along the flagged passage without uttering a
word, leaving Stowmaries to follow as he liked, and presently he threw
open the door which gave on the small parlour.

Though it was close on midnight, Mistress Peyton was not abed. She
had been to the Playhouse, and was still attired in that beautiful
cream-coloured brocade which had been the envy of the feminine portion
of the audience there; but though she was tired after the many and
varied emotions of that eventful day, yet she felt that she could
not have slept. Her proposals to Sir John Ayloffe, the schemes which
she well knew that the gambler would concoct, the possibility or
probability of ultimate success, harassed her nerves and fired her
brain.

She had spent the last two hours in that narrow room, now pacing up and
down like a caged rodent, now throwing herself down in a chair in an
agony of restlessness.

The advent of my lord Stowmaries occurred in the nick of time, for she
was on the verge of hysterics.

He knelt at her feet, adoring and excited. He told her all that had
occurred during that momentous evening, humbly begging her pardon for
having betrayed the secret of their mutual love, his own passion and
his despair, to some of his most intimate friends.

Mistress Julia whose flushed face when my lord entered might have
been caused by shyness at his stormy entrance, or by anger at the
untimeliness of his visit, looked adorable in her obvious agitation.
She chided him gently for his impetuosity, and for disclosing her
tender secret to those who mayhap would sneer at her hopeless love.

Then my lord told her of Sir John Ayloffe's scheme, the proposed public
disgrace of the tailor's daughter which would render the dissolution of
the child-marriage not only probable but certain. Mistress Julia looked
quite sad and shed sympathetic tears; she was so sorry, so very sorry
for the poor dear child.

But when she heard that my lord had actually promised one hundred and
twenty thousand pounds to his cousin Michael Kestyon for rendering him
this service, the fair Julia frowned and checked an angry exclamation
which had risen to her lips.

"The sum seems overvast," she remarked with affected indifference.

"The bribe had to be heavy, Mistress," replied my lord. "Michael was
the only man who could help us. He might have refused for less. It
had to be a fortune worth a gentleman's while to accept. Michael is a
gentleman despite his roguery, and we were asking him to do a mighty
villainous action. He had to be well paid for it," repeated the young
man decisively, "methinks that for less he would have refused."

Mistress Peyton allowed the subject to drop for the moment and her
lover to wander back into the realms of dithyrambic utterances, of
vows and of sighs. But anon she recurred to the question of the money,
showing a desire to know how and when it would be paid over.

"To-morrow when we have Michael's final acquiescence," said Stowmaries,
eager to dismiss this question, "I will hand over fifty thousand pounds
to him, and another seventy thousand the day on which Rose Marie Legros
leaves her father's shop in company with mine adventurous cousin."

"You talk lightly of such vast sums, my lord," said Julia.

"Would I not give my fortune to win you?" he rejoined.

She continued for a long time afterwards to listen shyly and adorably
to my lord's continued protestations, and when these became too
violent, she rang for her tiring-wench and with many charmingly-timid
blushes dismissed her adorer, promising to receive him again on the
morrow.

He went away quite happy, vowing that he would gladly have given not
only his entire fortune, but also his family estates and titles to
Michael for enabling him to regain his freedom and to marry the most
adorable woman in the whole world.

But Mistress Julia Peyton was not quite so content as all that. After
my lord's departure, she went up to her sleeping room and exchanging
her stiff brocade for a loose and easy wrap, she sat down in order to
think various matters out.

Agitation and restlessness had gone from her, but not the frown of
disapproval.

Her impetuous lover had been a fool, and Sir John a traitor to have
allowed such monstrous promises to be made to Michael Kestyon. Surely
her own kinsman should have known that her ardent love for my lord
of Stowmaries consisted in the main of an overmastering desire to
become a countess. Now with one hundred and twenty thousand pounds in
Michael's hands and given that claimant's obstinate temperament and
determination to carry his cause through, was there not a grave danger
that the wretch would win his case after all and that my lord would
presently have to yield his title and estates to the cousin whom he had
so needlessly rendered rich?

It was monstrous, silly and childish! Sir John of course must have
been well under the influence of liquor ere he allowed such a bargain,
without realising the danger which threatened his kinswoman's ambitious
desires.

She was mightily angry with Sir John, who should have been more shrewd,
and could not understand how it was that so astute and so unscrupulous
a schemer had overlooked the eventuality which she herself had foreseen
in a flash.

The first fifty thousand, well and good!--Julia supposed that so vast
a sum would certainly be required to bribe even a broken-down gentleman
to enter into Ayloffe's dishonourable schemes.

But the further seventy thousand, was unnecessary, she felt sure of
that and moreover it was dangerous.

Would it not be the most bitter irony of which Fate was capable if the
tailor's daughter became Countess of Stowmaries after all?

Such a thing had become possible now, nay, probable, thanks to the
blunder made by Sir John. As for my lord, he seemed unaware of the
danger--he was too fond of laughing at Michael Kestyon's pretensions,
and was ever inclined to dismiss them as puerile and beneath contempt;
mayhap, too, that he was fatuous enough to think that even without
wealth or title his adored one would become his.

But the adored one had no such intention.

Like unto the adventurer himself up in that squalid garret above the
roofs of London, Mistress Peyton could not rest that night. Her active
mind was troubled with plans of how to undo the blunders of the past
hour.

And whilst Michael dreamed of future glory, of power and of wealth,
Julia racked her woman's brain to find a means to bring him back to the
dust.




                               PART III




                             CHAPTER XVII

                 Her eyes were deeper than the depth
                    Of waters still at even:
                 She had three lilies in her hand,
                 And the stars in her hair were seven.
                                        --DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.


"No, no, my cabbage, I do not find that plain gown becoming, of a
verity thou must remember that thou art an English Countess and must
henceforth adorn thy person with proper grandeur."

And worthy Mme. Legros, whilst vainly trying to express disapproval,
gazed with obvious admiration at the dainty apparition before her.

"Let be, Maman, let be!" interposed Papa Legros soothingly, "the chit
is well enough as she is. When she is over there in England, she may
well look grand and stately; for the present she is still a tailor's
daughter and I'll challenge the world to produce a daintier bale of
goods. _Par ma foi!_ were I not thy father, my pigeon, I were tempted
to envy that profligate young scoundrel, thy noble lord and husband.
'Tis a mightily succulent morsel he will bite into the nonce."

Rose Marie striving to hide the confusion, which her kind father's
broad allusion caused in her sensitive young heart, buried her face in
the bouquet of snowdrops which she held in her hand.

No wonder that her adoring parents were proud of her. She looked a
picture on this cold winter's morning, standing there in her little
room beneath the eaves, clad in pure white like the snow which lay
thick on the narrow window sill and along the streets of Paris.

She had fashioned her gown herself, of white grogram with a beautiful
openwork lace pinner and delicate kerchief demurely folded across her
young bosom. Her fair hair was dressed in small curls all over her
small head, her neck was bare, as were her arms and hands, and in
colour as delicate as the snowdrops which she carried.

The spring was still in its infancy and snowdrops were very scarce;
worthy M. Legros had paid a vast sum of money in order that Rose Marie
should carry a bouquet when first she met her lord.

All white she looked--almost like a little snow image, only that her
cheeks glowed with the excitement in her blood, and her bosom rose
and fell with unwonted rapidity beneath the filmy folds of her muslin
kerchief.

My lord of Stowmaries had arrived in Paris the evening before, and had
sent one of his serving-men round to say that he would come and pay his
respects before midday.

Oh! there seemed no laggardness about him now. The influence of
Monseigneur the Archbishop and no doubt his own better nature had
prevailed at last, and since a fortnight ago when his letter arrived
announcing his coming, he seemed to have lost no time in useless
preparations.

Now he was here in Paris and Rose Marie had put on her pretty gown
in order to receive him. She did so mightily desire to please him,
for she on her side was quite ready to give him that respectful love
which husbands demand of their wives. Mme. Legros had fussed round
the child all the morning, and though she grumbled at the simplicity
of the gown, she could not help but admire the exquisite picture of
innocent girlhood which her daughter presented with such charming
unconsciousness.

Rose Marie had been singularly silent all the while that she dressed.
She was very anxious to be beautiful, and thought that this could
not be accomplished without much care and trouble. This she bestowed
ungrudgingly on every curl as she twisted and pinned it up, on every
fold of her kerchief, on the tying of her shoe.

She had taken over two hours in completing her toilet, selecting with
scrupulous care each article of dainty underlinen, which her own
fingers had embroidered months ago, in anticipation of this great day:
the white stockings, the silken garters, the beribboned shift and
petticoat.

When she was ready, she called to maman to come and inspect, and oh!
to criticise if there were any fault to find, which maman of a surety
would detect. Mme. Legros determined not to let affection blind her,
had turned the snow-white apparition round and round, seeking for
defects, where none existed, readjusting a curl here, a ribbon there,
and finally calling to good M. Legros to come and give his verdict on
the picture.

But good M. Legros was far too adoring to do aught but admire. So now
Rose Marie, if not quite free from doubt, was at any rate satisfied
that everything which could be done to render her beautiful and
desirable, had of a truth been done.

"We had best go down, Maman," said Legros at last, when he had finished
feasting his eyes on the beauty of his daughter, "and make ready to
receive milor. The child had best remain up here, and not enter the
parlour until her lord is there, ready to greet her as she advances."

The worthy tailor was more agitated than he cared to own. He felt
fussy and could not manage to sit still. It still lacked nearly an hour
to midday, and he was ready and over-ready to receive milor. He bustled
maman out of the room, then ran back to have a final look at Rose Marie.

"Keep calm, my treasure," he said agitatedly, "_par Dieu_! There's no
need for excitement. Thou art not the first and only bride who has ever
been claimed by an unknown husband. 'Tis milor, no doubt, who feels
flustered. He has been in the wrong and comes to make amends. Not a
very pleasant position for a proud English lord, eh, my pigeon? But
thou art within thy rights, and wilt receive him with becoming dignity."

With gentle, insinuating gestures Rose Marie contrived to lead her
father out of the room, and finally to close the door behind him.

Time was hurrying on and she did so want to be alone and to think. This
was the end of the old life, the beginning of the new: the new with all
its hopes, its fears, its mysteries. She had put it very pertinently to
her mother when she said that nothing, nothing would ever be quite the
same again.

Now that dear Papa Legros' heavy footsteps had died down the steep
staircase, Rose Marie could sit by the open window and just think of
it all, for the last time, before these mysteries of the new life were
revealed to her.

I think that what struck her as most curious in the future was the idea
that she would never be quite alone again. For she had--despite the
loving care of adoring parents--been very much alone. We must remember
that there is never complete harmony between the young and the old.
The former live for the future, the latter for the present, oft times
only for the past. Papa and Maman Legros found their joy in seeing Rose
Marie grow up and live, like some beautiful flower, carefully tended,
guarded against the tearing winds of life, nourished, fed and caressed.
But Rose Marie thought she cherished her parents, dreamed of the time
when she would be a woman with another home, with other affections,
with other kindred. Therefore she was lonely even in the midst of her
happy home. There was a great deal that Rose Marie did not understand
in life, but there was an infinity which maman would never comprehend.

Would this newcomer, this stranger understand better than maman, she
wondered. Would he know what ailed her when in the very midst of joy
she suddenly felt inclined to cry? Would he then know just the right
word to say, the right word to soothe her, and to fit in with her mood?

There were other thoughts that flew through Rose Marie's mind during
this, the last lonely hour of her girlhood, but these she would not
allow to linger in her mind, for they caused her cheeks to blush, and
her heart to beat with sudden, nameless fear. She had seen the girls
and boys of Paris wandering arm in arm in the woods of Fontainebleau,
she had seen a fair head leaning against a dark head, and lips meeting
lips in a furtive kiss, and now in her innocent heart she wondered what
it felt like thus to be kissed.

Hush!--sh!--sh!--No, no! Maman was not there to see the quick blush
which at the thought rose to the girlish cheek. Maman would not
understand. She would say gaily: "_Pardi_ my cabbage! but thy husband
shall kiss thee of a truth and right lustily on thy fresh cheeks or thy
budding mouth. A good, round, sounding kiss an he loves thee, which of
course he will!" And the girls, too, in the woods at Fontainebleau,
they usually laughed after that furtive kiss snatched behind some
tree, when they thought that no one was looking.

But Rose Marie did not think that she would laugh when my lord kissed
her. It seemed to her so strange that girls should make light of such
wondrous moments in their lives. Rose Marie thought that when my lord
kissed her she would probably cry, not in grief, oh, no! but with a
strange exultant joy because of his love for her.

And that was what she hoped that he would understand.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                 And a bird overhead sang "Follow"!
                 And a bird to the right sang "Here";
                 And the arch of the leaves was hollow
                 And the meaning of May was clear.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


But good M. Legros could not contrive to sit still.

He had gone down into the parlour and worried maman, until, poor soul,
she had put milk into the metheglin, in mistake for ale, and had to
brew the mixture all over again, quite a quantity of good Spanish wine
having been completely spoilt, owing to the fidgety temper of her lord.

He hung round her whilst she evolved the fresh bowl of posset, and
made her so nervous that in desperation, fearing that more waste of
expensive liquid would ensue, she ran upstairs loudly calling to Rose
Marie to come down and help keep papa quiet by engaging him in a game
of cribbage.

Therefore it was that when with loud clatter of hoofs on the rough
pavement of the Rue de l'Ancienne Comédie, my lord and his retinue drew
rein outside the tailor's shop, Rose Marie was sitting in the room
above playing cribbage with her father.

She heard the noise of the horses, the brief word of command as the
small party halted, but not for all the treasures of this world could
she at this moment have risen in order to peep out of the window and
thus get a glimpse of her future husband.

Papa rose in great agitation. Maman ceased fussing round the room and
there was silence for a time, the while no doubt my lord dismounted.
Then M. and Mme. Legros went out of the room in order to welcome the
distinguished guest. But Rose Marie sat quite still, with her trembling
fingers clasped tightly round the tiny bouquet of snowdrops. Through
the window behind her the spring sun peeped in, pale and tender, and
searching the remote corner of the homely parlour found the dainty,
white-clad figure of the girl and touching her fair hair with the magic
of its kiss turned it into an aureole of gold.

The door opened and Michael entered. Thus he saw her for the first
time--she, the woman whom he had been paid to wrong.

He realised this the moment he saw her. In all the whirl of riotous
thought which had assailed him during the past three weeks since that
night which he had spent in self-communion, the impression of the
woman had never been a lasting one. He had never thought of her as a
distinct personality, as a creature of flesh and blood with thoughts
and feelings mayhap as deep as his own.

To his mind so far she had only been a tool, a sexless means to his
ends: and this man who had such a passionate attachment for his mother,
such a sense of her worth and importance, had given but a very cursory
thought to her who was to become his wife by a trick.

In this we must do him justice, that he did not dream of wronging the
woman, who was the channel which Fortune had selected for her welcome
course towards him. His cousin Stowmaries would of course repudiate
her, that was understood. Undoubtedly he would be allowed to do this:
but he--Michael Kestyon--would atone for his kinsman's villainy, he
would keep, honour and respect her as his wife and the future mother
of his children, and make her--by the will of God, the King and the
Lords' House of Parliament, and by the power of his newly acquired
wealth--Countess of Stowmaries despite the rogues who had planned to
oust her from that place.

Because of all these good resolutions, Michael had therefore
anticipated his meeting with his future wife with perfect equanimity. I
do not think that during the many preparations for his journey which he
had to see to in the past three weeks, he ever tried even for a moment
to picture to himself what she would be like.

Now she stood before him, in the full charm of her innocent girlhood,
clad all in white, with her little hands clasping that bunch of
flowers, the pale rays of an April sun touching her fair hair with
gold. Her blue eyes were raised shyly to him just for an instant as she
rose to meet him. He thought her elegant and pretty, stately, too, in
her prim white gown.

"She was born to be a great lady," he thought to himself with an inward
chuckle, "and by Gad I'll make her one."

In his mind--which seemed all in a whirl now--he compared her to
Mistress Julia Peyton, and thought his cousin a mighty fool for
preferring the latter.

He bowed very low as Rose Marie advanced and at an encouraging word
from maman, she placed her hand on his, and he kissed the tips of her
ice-cold fingers.

"A snow-maiden, by my faith!" he thought to himself. "Michael, thou
rogue! Thou'lt of a surety have to infuse warmth into those pale
cheeks."

She felt almost paralyzed with shyness, and very angry with herself
for seeming so gauche and stupid. The while she curtsied to my lord
in the most approved and primmest of fashions, the little bouquet of
snowdrops escaped her trembling fingers. My lord stooped and picked it
up, and she held out her hand for it, but he met her swift and timid
glance with a bold challenge, and raised the bouquet to his lips before
he hid it in the folds of his surcoat.

Rose Marie thought her future lord picturesque in his elegant
accoutrements; the fine cloth of his coat, of a dull shade of red,
the cut of his garments, the delicate bit of lace at throat and wrist
set off the massive strength of his figure: she was not quite sure if
he were really handsome, for there was a curious look in his eyes,
especially when they met hers which she had never seen in any man
before, and a strange setting of mouth and jaw which did I not suggest
the love-sick husband.

But she liked his easy bearing as he talked to maman with an easy
familiarity that proclaimed high birth and, gentle breeding. He had
declined for himself Mme. Legros' offers of refreshment in the shape
of mead or aromatic wines, but accepted gratefully when she offered to
take mugs of steaming ale out to his men.

Rose Marie felt as if this were all a dream, and as if she would wake
anon in her narrow bed behind the cotton curtains in her room under
the eaves. She took several furtive glances at her future lord, and
felt not a little piqued that he took so little heed of her. After
that first hand kiss, and that quick flash of his deep-set eyes, when
he hid her bouquet in his coat, she had not caught him once looking at
her--was it because he did not think her fair?

Papa talked incessantly, and presently maman came back, and in that
same vague dream-like way Rose Marie seemed to hear them talking about
the wedding ceremony. My lord seemed impatient and anxious to get
through the necessary formalities prescribed by the Church, and then
to take his bride away with him to England as quickly as possible.
Obviously she was not to be left alone with her future husband just
now; and though in her young heart, she had looked forward to the
moment when she would be alone with my lord, she now felt relieved at
the thought that it was not to be.

Poor Rose Marie was bitterly disappointed. It had all been so very,
very different--this first meeting--to what she had anticipated. She
felt very angry with herself indeed for being so childish and so
timid--no doubt by now my lord had set her down as a silly goose quite
unfit to be a great English lady. At this thought she felt tears of
shame welling to her eyes, and was infinitely relieved when maman took
hold of her hand and led her out of the room.

She bowed to my lord, and then held her head very erect as she walked
past him to the door; she wanted to look proud and defiant now, for
she had felt those strange deep-set eyes of his fixed upon her with an
expression she could not define.

And when she was alone in her room, she went straight to the image of
the Virgin Mary which hung against the wall close to her narrow bed.
She knelt on the prie-dieu beneath it, and she begged the Holy Mother
of God to teach her not to be rebellious, and to be ready to obey her
lord in all things, to give him love and respect, "And O holy Mary,
Mother of God!" she added with a pitiful little sigh, "if it be in your
power to make my lord love me, then I humbly pray you tell him so to
do; and whisper to me from on high what I must do to please him and to
find favour in his sight."




                              CHAPTER XIX

                    Smiling, frowning, evermore
                    Thou art perfect in love-lore.
                                                      --TENNYSON.


"My cabbage," said Maman Legros in that decisive tone, which she
only assumed on great occasions, and which then no one dreamed of
contradicting, "what thou dost ask is entirely out of the question.
It is not seemly for a maiden to be left alone in company with her
lord. Why! every one down the street would know of it--thy father's
'prentices would make mock of thee--and thy reputation would be as
surely gone as is thistle-down after a gale."

"But, Maman," hazarded Rose Marie, bold for the first time in her
life, in the face of maman's stern refusal, "my lord is not my future
husband. He _is_ my husband, and surely I have the right to talk to him
alone sometimes."

"Rose Marie, thou talkest like a goose, that cackles without
understanding," replied maman sternly, "though my lord is thy husband
by law and by the will of the Church, he will not be thy true lord
until the day after to-morrow, when thou wilt ratify thy vows to love,
honour and humbly obey him, which vows I, thy mother, took in thy name
eighteen years ago. Before thou hast spoken them with thine own lips,
after High Mass on Wednesday, thou dost an unseemly and unmaiden-like
act in wishing to be alone in his company. Truly thy guardian angel
must be veiling his face with the shame of thee at the present moment."

But Rose Marie refused to look upon the troubles of her guardian angel
with proper compunction. She still felt rebellious and argumentative;
but she changed her tactics. The sly young damsel realised that she
had taken maman the wrong way and that she would gain nothing by
controversy. She, therefore, brought forth her other weapons of attack,
certain methods of pressure on the parental will which hitherto she had
never known to fail.

She commenced proceedings by allowing her blue eyes to be veiled in
tears, then seeing that maman turned her face away so as not to be
forced to look on those pathetic dewdrops the rogue went close up to
her mother and kneeling beside her put two loving arms round the old
woman's shoulders.

"Maman!" she whispered with quivering lips.

"'Tis no use," retorted maman obdurately.

"Only one very tiny, short quarter of an hour, Maman _chérie_--after
dinner--when papa goes downstairs to set the afternoon work to the
'prentices--you could be busy in the kitchen--accidentally--just for
one quarter of an hour--Maman _chérie_!"

The pleading voice was hard to resist. Maman tried to steel her heart
and obstinately turned away from those liquid eyes, drowned in tears.

"But in the name of the Holy Virgin, child," she said gruffly, "what is
there that thou wouldst say to my lord, that thou canst not do in thy
mother's presence?"

"'Tis not what I would say, Maman--" rejoined Rose Marie in a soft
murmur quite close to maman's ear.

"Then what?"

"I want to hear him speak to me, Maman _chérie_--oh, I am sure that he
will say naught that is unseemly--he is too proud and too rigid for
that--but, when you and papa are in the room he never, never speaks to
me at all--I have oft wondered if he thought me a goose. When he comes,
he greets me of a truth as if I were a queen, he kisses my hand--and
bows in the most correct manner--then, when I sing to him and play on
the harpsichord, he praises my voice, and coldly thanks me for the
entertainment--"

"And 'tis right and proper conduct on the part of a great gentleman,"
retorted maman hotly, "thou wouldst not have him kiss thee, as if thou
wert a kitchen wench."

But Rose Marie did not commit herself into saying what she did wish in
this matter, but continued with seeming irrelevance.

"When I go out of the room, after the frigid and stately adieux which
my lord bestows upon me, I oft hear his ringing, merry voice echoing
up the stairs, right through the walls to my room. I hear papa and
you laughing, in obvious response to his sallies--and once--it was
yesterday--I stayed peeping over the bannister until my lord departed--"

"Very unseemly behaviour," growled maman whilst an obvious blush rose
to her fat cheeks, and her little, beady eyes seemed to twinkle at a
certain recollection.

"I saw my lord take thee in his arms, Maman," continued Rose Marie with
stern reproach, "and he imprinted two such kisses on thy cheeks that
literally raised the echoes in the house and must have been heard in
the 'prentices' shop."

Maman made great efforts to preserve her gravity.

"Well!" she said, "and if he did--I am old enough to be his mother--and
would it had pleased God to give me a son like him! Those merry eyes
give joy to my heart when I look into them, and he has such funny ways
with him--such amusing sallies--why not later than yesterday, he said,
speaking of Mme. Renaud, the cobbler's wife down the street, that--"

Maman caught Rose Marie's blue eyes fixed eagerly upon her--there were
no tears in them now--only excitement and curiosity--Maman promptly
checked her own flow of eloquence and suddenly resumed her gruff, stern
voice.

"But that is naught for thee, my pigeon--and now, enough of this
talk--the _pot-au-feu_ will be boiling over."

She wore a great air of finality now and would have risen but for Rose
Marie's clinging arms.

"Maman darling," pleaded the girl.

"Nonsense!" retorted Mme. Legros decisively.

"One little, tiny, very, very short quarter of an hour."

"Nonsense."

"I want so to know what he would say when we are alone--he could not
sit before me mute as a carp, and stiff as papa's wooden measure. I
want to hear his merry voice myself. I want to see--what he looks
like--when he laughs."

"Nonsense," reiterated maman for the third time.

But even as she spoke the word, she looked down upon the beautiful
upturned head, the glowing eyes, the quivering lips parted in earnest
pleading, and like the thistle-down in a gale, which she herself had
quoted, the worthy old woman's resistance fell away.

"Of a truth thou'rt a rogue," she said more gently.

"Fifteen minutes, Maman."

"Thy father would not hear of it."

"He need not know. When he goes down after dinner--to set the work for
the 'prentices."

Maman hesitated one moment longer, but that final hesitation was
useless by now. The fortress had yielded to the powerful weapons of the
loved one in tears.

"Very well," she said. And Rose Marie jumped to her feet with a little
cry of triumph. "But remember," continued maman with stern, upraised
finger, "it shall be ten minutes and no more."




                              CHAPTER XX

                                   --So that hour died
                 Like odour rapt into the winged wind
                 Borne into alien lands and far away.
                                                     --TENNYSON.


Thus it was that this day, after maman had cleared the debris of
dinner, and papa went downstairs to set the 'prentices to their
afternoon's work, that no sooner had Rose Marie sat down to her
harpsichord and begun to sing:

             "La nuit écoute et se penche sur l'onde
             Pour y cueillir rien qu'un souffle d'amour,"

then maman gave a slight cry of surprise, and jumped to her feet
exclaiming:

"Oh, _mon Dieu_! I had forgot the pot-au-feu--it must be boiling over,"
and incontinently ran out of the room.

Rose Marie continued her song. She was sitting with her back to the
light, and my lord straight in front of her: and as her young voice
rose and fell to the simple cadence of the old song, she was able to
throw many a veiled look in his direction.

At first when maman ran away, he had made a movement as if he would
follow her, then seeing that Rose Marie remained at the harpsichord, he
seemed to think that mayhap courtesy compelled him to remain with her.
He sat down again in the high-backed arm chair and rested his head in
his hand. Every time that Rose Marie looked up she caught his deep-set
eyes fixed upon her. Strangely enough the look in them seemed quite
sad--indeed if it were possible in one so rich and in so high-born a
gentleman--Rose Marie would almost have imagined that my lord's whole
attitude was one which made appeal to her tenderness and even to her
pity.

Then when the last note of her song died away in a soft murmur, my lord
rose and came up to her.

"What a sweet voice you have, Rose Marie," he said in that even, gentle
voice with which he usually addressed her and which seemed to her
veiled with studied coldness, "and 'tis a tender song which you sang."

"It pleases me, my lord, that it should find favour with you," she
replied demurely, the while she allowed her long lashes to veil the
light of excitement which danced in her eyes.

"Nay! who am I that you should try to please me, dear heart?" he said
a trifle sadly, "rather is it I who with my whole mind and soul and
strength should strive to make you happy."

"That were not very difficult, my lord."

She would then and there have liked to give her excitement fuller rein,
to jump up, to clasp her hands together and to look up into his grave
face and say: "Only, only be kind and gentle to me, give me as much
love as ever you can--I am prepared to be the truest, most devoted,
most loving wife that e'er strove to be a joy to her lord. Give me
sunshine, and gaiety and laughter, and what meed of love you are able
to give."

But she did not quite dare to say and do all that, for maman's
admonitions were still fresh in her mind, and her guardian angel would
of a surety have had to veil his face again before this unseemly
behaviour on the part of his turbulent charge.

Therefore she added somewhat tamely:

"I have been taught to be easily contented, and meseems that by
honouring me with your love, you, my lord, would be doing all that God
doth ask of you."

Though she had spoken lightly, almost flippantly, for her heart was
glad, and her mind free from any presage of sorrow, his face, which all
along had been passing grave now looked deeply troubled at her words.

"Doing all that God doth ask of me," he exclaimed with sudden
vehemence, whilst a tone of bitterness, which she could not understand,
rang through his usually clear and fresh voice. "Nay, little snowdrop,
therein you wrong divine justice--if indeed there be one. Dear heart,
were I from this time forth to shed drop by drop all the blood of my
veins, were I to give my life inch by inch, my flesh piece by piece
to secure your happiness, even then I would not be doing all that God
would ask of me."

He had turned from her and while he spoke he paced up and down the
narrow room like some untamed creature fretful of its cage; then he
broke into a laugh--not the merry laugh which she had so oft heard
ringing through the house, but a harsh outburst of passionate sarcasm,
which had an undercurrent in it of deep and hidden sorrow. Rose Marie
felt a wealth of pity surging in her heart, when she heard that
mirthless laugh. Yet was it not passing strange that she, an humble
tradesman's daughter, with no knowledge of that great world in which
lived my lord, that she should thus dare to pity this noble, high-born
and rich English gentleman? But she could not combat the feeling and
her innocent blue eyes watching his restless movements, and that
troubled look on his face, were filled with the tears of womanly
compassion.

She looked divinely pretty thus, sitting at the harpsichord, one
delicate hand idly resting on the ivory keys, from which almost
unconsciously she had just evoked one sweet and melancholy chord from
out the soul of the old instrument, like a long-drawn-out sigh of
unspoken sorrow. Her young bosom rose and fell beneath the folds of
the primly folded kerchief, and her upturned face showed the white
column of her throat round which nestled a string of pearls, large and
translucent--his bridal gift to her.

He paused beside her, and in his expressive face the signs of a great
inward combat became strangely visible. Then he knelt down, close to
her, and with a curious gesture half masterful and half appealing he
took both her hands and imprisoned them in his own. He looked straight
into those tear-dimmed eyes, with a questioning look that seemed to
probe the very depths of her soul.

"My lord you are troubled," she said gently.

"Ay, little snowdrop," he replied, "deeply troubled at sight of the
exquisite purity which speaks to me with such mute eloquence from out
the depths of your blue eyes. How dare I, miserable wretch, drag you
from out that secluded garden of innocence wherein you have grown to
such perfect beauty. How dare I with impious hand guide you toward
that great outer world which lies so far beyond the glorious land of
your girlish dreams? It is a world, dear heart, wherein great monsters
dwell, pollution, sin and evil and that canker of corruption which will
inevitably mar the calyx of the snowdrop and cause her white petals to
droop at its touch."

"I have no fear of that great world, my lord," she rejoined simply,
"since I will enter it in your company."

"No, no, you must not talk like that, dear heart," he said with strange
persistence, "you must not trust me so. What do you know of me or of
my life? You so young, so pure, so exquisite, and I--"

He paused and pushing her hands away with a rough, impetuous movement
he jumped to his feet and once more resumed his restless wanderings up
and down the room.

"Have you ever wandered, little one, in the forests round Cluny," he
asked with one of those sudden transitions in voice and manner which
puzzled her so, "and paused beside that pool which the country folk
about there call the Lake of Sighs? Yes, I see from your telltale eyes
that you do remember it. Well then, you must oft have seen it lying
silent and stagnant beneath the shades of the overhanging willows,
whilst on its smooth, dark surface water lilies as white as snowdrops
rear their stately heads in June. You should see these in the spring
tall and majestic, with graceful upright stems and fragrant, wide-open
buds, which seem to invite with a kind of cold aloofness the rough
caresses and kisses of the bee. Tall and majestic like you, dear heart,
pure and coldly innocent like your soul--the spring, coy and cool,
smiles and passes by, leaving those lilies to face the scorching breath
of awakened summer. Have you stood beside the Lake of Sighs, little
one, when dying a summer draws out her last sigh of agony? When rank
weeds and poisonous plants begin to grow apace from out the slimy ooze
which encircles the pool, and throw out sinewy, death-dealing arms
along its peaceful surface? Then noisome trails of slugs and grime
skim the once pure waters of the pond and rank growths of coarse weeds
cover the slender stems of the lilies, and drag them down, down until
the stately flowers, weighted with mud-scattering rain bend their proud
heads to the mire, the while in their slimy hovels, loathsome toads
croak their chorus in unison. The world to which I must take you,
little snowdrop, is just such another pool, you the lily and I the
weed--and men and women the loud-voiced croakers who are always ready
to proclaim triumphantly the pollution of a work of God."

Whilst he spoke he halted opposite to her and looking down into her
face he studied every line of it, watching for the first look of horror
which would mar its perfect peace. He was conscious of a strange desire
to see her afraid of him, to feel that at his words her innocence would
rebel, that if after what he had said he attempted to touch her, she
would shrink away in unexplainable horror.

Now that he was alone with her for the first time, and could study
at leisure every line of her graceful form, the perfect shell which
contained a perfect soul, the first poisoned fangs of remorse fastened
themselves into his heart, and impatient of the monster's attack, he
strove to smother it, and thus longed to see her less trustful, less
innocent, even--God help him--less pure!

Already he was searching for justification for that great wrong which
he was about to commit, nay which he did commit with every word of
gentleness which he spoke to her, with every moment that he spent in
her company. Therefore he tried to make his voice harsh and rough, he
did not want the child's regard, her trust, her allegiance. He would
have had her ambitious, sordid and grasping for in this he could
satisfy her by and bye, when he had all the promised riches in his
hands, and had made her Countess of Stowmaries. He would have had her
look on him as a necessary means to her own ends, as a man who would at
best be wholly indifferent to her, or if that could not be, then as a
man whom she would hate.

But in spite of all he said, in spite of his harsh words, and strange
imageries, the meaning of which she scarce understood, yet almost
feared to guess, her face remained perfectly calm, and her eyes--still
tender and compassionate--met his in absolute, childlike serenity.

"I am not afraid of entering that world, my lord," she said, "with you
to guide me."

"What a brave snowdrop," he said, "nay, you foolish little daughter of
the frosts, you'll want an angel to guard you and to stand 'twixt you
and me. I begin to think that cold ice-maiden though you be, you must
at some time of your brief terrestrial existence have offended the
God who made you, since He has thought fit to punish you so severely
by giving you for husband the most abandoned sinner that ever defiled
His earth. Or was it in a former existence, dear heart, when you dwelt
amidst the snows that you roused the ire of devils to such an extent
that they swore to be revenged on you, once you were a woman and could
understand and feel. 'Twas a cowardly revenge of a surety, for there
were other men--less vile, less corrupt, less contemptible than he in
whose hand you so trustfully place yours. God forgive me, but meseems
that I do feel tempted to draw aside the veil of ignorance which
lies before your blue eyes, and to show you pictures of evil and of
wretchedness from which your calm soul would shrink in horror, and even
your serene virginity would recoil in fear. See the abandoned wretch
that I am! I would rouse terror in those eyes--which hitherto have been
the blue and opaque windows through which a placid soul hath gazed
upon the devilries of mankind--and gazing hath not seen. Dear heart,
how will you bear it, this first contact with pollution, and with sin;
my hand to guide you, my finger to be the one to point the hideous
way?--Broad the priests call it, and an easy descent to Hell, lined
with the grinning faces of monstrous ghouls, one of which is called
drunkenness, the other licentiousness, whilst blasphemy is the constant
companion of both--and right and left from the road itself stand those
hideous booths where poverty and degradation shrink out of sight in the
dark hours of the evening gloom, and where hovers--like a gigantic bat
with black and loathsome wings outspread and claw-like feet that grip
and tear--that cruel Titan, called Remorse. Little snowdrop, snow-white
and so pure, how will you trust after that, the hand that would guide
you still further on the way, the voice that in its agony of shame
would yet murmur in your ears promises of a turning out of the hideous
road, a turning which leads to happiness and peace?"

His voice broke in a sigh which was almost a sob. Gradually as he spoke
he had drawn nearer to her, until his knee touched the ground, and his
head was bowed in his hands. But had he looked at her face even now
he would not on any line of it have seen the slightest sign of the
fear which he wished to evoke, nor of the loathing which he would have
conjured up, yet would dread to see.

Only her eyes as pure, as childlike as before, were veiled in the tears
of infinite pity. There was silence for awhile in the little parlour,
her hands had fallen away from the keys of the harpsichord. Only the
old clock ticked solemnly on, marking the brief minutes wherein these
two souls met each other in this their first communion. Then as she
did not speak, his whole soul recoiled at thought of losing her and
a great dread seized him, lest after all she had understood, and in
understanding, turned away from him in fear.

And humbly, gently, not daring to look up, and murmuring scarce above a
whisper, he said:

"Little snowdrop, would you trust me still?"

And whilst despite iron will, obstinacy and pride hot tears would surge
to his eyes and sear his aching lids, he suddenly felt a light touch,
soft and cool as a snowflake, a tiny hand resting upon his shoulder.

"I trusted you ere this, my lord," she said simply, "trusted and
honoured you, mayhap a little feared you as my lord and master. But
now, methinks that a great sorrow lies buried in your heart--you choose
to call it sin--mayhap it is--that I do not know--I am a woman--soon to
be your wife, but never your judge, my lord. And if you have sinned,
then you stand nearer to me, who am so far from that perfection which,
alas! you see in me. If I feared you before, my lord--meseems that I
could love you now."

To Michael Kestyon, with a life of insubordination behind him, a life
of debauchery, of loneliness and lovelessness, it seemed as if some
unknown Heaven had opened and he had his first vision of what paradise
might be. A paradise wherein voices of angels spoke to him of love, and
cool white hands, cold as snowflakes yet infinitely gentle, led him
towards that open door. That tiny snowflake fell from his shoulder onto
his own burning hands, and to his vague astonishment it did not melt at
the contact, but lay there cool and soft, mayhap a little trembling,
having suddenly changed into some fairy bird.

Michael pressed his hot forehead against it, his eyes and then his
lips. His whole soul cried out mutely now in a passionate longing
for happiness. Womanly tenderness, womanly pity awaited him in that
paradise, the door of which stood open, and if honour long since
dormant called out loudly against treachery and against a trick, who
shall pronounce judgment on this man, if he had not the strength at
this moment to respond to that call?

With his own hands now, with one word spoken by his own lips, he could
shut against himself those glorious gates of Heaven, and deliberately
turn his back on that brief vision of paradise, and walk once more down
that hideous path which leads straight to Hell.

There were but the two courses open to him. The one was to take this
trusting, loving woman to his heart, to guard and keep her in happiness
and peace, whilst showering on her all the gifts which her weaker
nature might desire. He was rich now, would be richer still, he could
satisfy her ambition, and by constant love and tender care, he could
win her heart and her inner self in time, even though he had won her
person by a trick.

The other course was the rugged path to which the inexorable hand of
almost barbaric honour pointed relentlessly, to tell her all and to
lose her forever. To throw back in his kinsman's face the price of
this girl's innocence, and then to go back to that life in London, the
drinking booths, the degrading hovels, the propinquity of abandoned
reprobates as despicable as he had been himself before he met her.

Pity him if you can!--judge him not if you've never been tempted to
chose 'twixt life and living death, 'twixt happiness and degradation,
'twixt the hand of an angel and the gripping tentacles of devils.

Pity him for he was only a man, with a burning thirst for happiness, a
mad longing for love and for peace.

Michael Kestyon kissed the little hand which had confirmed the promise
of love spoken by the girl's pure lips. He looked up then and met her
eyes. Heaven alone knows what he would have said or done the next
moment. The Fates who in their distant, rock-bound cavern spin the
threads of destiny decreed that these two people should --ere another
word was spoken between them--be incontinently hurled from out the
realms of romance wherein they had wandered hand in hand for over ten
minutes.

For that--as we know--was the time limit set by maman, for allowing her
daughter to be alone in the company of my lord. And Michael had only
just time to free the small imprisoned hand so that it might wander
back to the keys of the harpsichord ere Mme. Legros--rubicund, fussy
and prosy--made irruption into the room.

Thus it was that for Michael Kestyon the gates of paradise remained for
the nonce invitingly open, nor did the Fates give him another chance to
close them against his own happiness.




                              CHAPTER XXI

  Love took up the Harp of Life and smote on all the chords with might;
  Smote the chord of Self, that, trembling, pass'd in music out of sight.
                                                      --TENNYSON.


The old, majestic Church of St. Gervais had been made quite gay with
flowers. Good M. Legros was passing rich, thank God! He could gratify
his only child's every whim--however trivial--on this her wedding day.

She had expressed a great desire to see the church quite full of
flowers--as many flowers as it could hold, and Papa Legros had
spent--so the gossips said--enough money in indulging this wish as
would have kept a dozen poor families in comfort for a dozen years.

'Twas mid April and there were white roses from the King's
conservatories in Versailles, white hyacinths from Fontainebleau and
white violas from the walled-in gardens at Blois, there were white
violets and snowdrops and sweet-scented narcissi. They lay everywhere
in heavy fragrant bunches and wreaths fashioned by loving hands,
untutored in the art of decoration. The high altar groaned beneath the
weight of huge brass pots wherein old-fashioned stocks reared their
sweet-scented heads. The Virgin in her niche, the saints upon their
altars almost disappeared beneath their monster crowns of violets and
of roses.

The central nave was filled with a motley crowd, attired in holiday
clothes, come to see the tailor's daughter wedded to the English milor.
A few simple folk there were--gaffers and cronies who had watched Rose
Marie as she grew up in her father's back shop, and who came with
shaking heads and ominous murmurs to see the last of the poor child,
who of a surety would be drowned when she sailed upon the sea or if she
did survive that calamity, would certainly be most unhappy in a land
of evil-doers, and of cruel, red-haired, large-toothed men. But there
were others, too, mere idlers these, who had never before set eyes on
an English milor, and were curious to know if what was said of these
English were true, namely that they were big as giants and like them
ferocious, with fangs instead of teeth, and fists as heavy as bullocks.

Under one of the arches, quite close to the chancel, special places had
been reserved and chairs covered with red cloth. Here a small group of
gaily-dressed ladies and gentlemen had assembled, gilded butterflies
flown from out their silken nets over in the St. Germain quarter and
even from the Louvre and Versailles; gentlemen of the court and of His
Majesty's bedchamber with their ladies in stiff brocaded paniers and
silken skirts which made a soft swishing sound as the wearers turned
to right or left to lend an ear to the whisperings of a gallant or to
murmur a word of scandal in that of a friend.

They had crossed the river and wandered into this abandoned quarter of
the city from idle curiosity. Rumours had reached the Court that the
Earl of Stowmaries, one of the richest young gallants of London, had
come to wed the daughter of the Paris breeches-maker, a man well-known
to all. His Majesty had deigned to seem interested, Mme. de Montespan
expressed a desire to see this milor, whom gossip had reported as
handsome and had endowed with the romantic history of early life
spent in distant lands, where he was kept in poverty and exiled by a
rapacious kinsman, who robbed him of his inheritance.

Gossip as a rule had mingled truth with fiction, but the marquise was
interested and brought her brilliantly decked-out sycophants in her
train--gentlemen and ladies who sunned themselves in the sunshine of
her graces,--to witness the ceremony of St. Gervais. From this group
beneath the archway came the constant murmur of fluttering fans, the
rustle of silks, the creaking of chairs on the flag-stones of the
floor--also at times a giggle quickly suppressed, a cry of astonishment
or amusement held in check only by the solemnity of the surroundings.

The atmosphere was waxing oppressive, despite the cold April breeze
which found its way into the edifice through the chinks of many
cracked window panes. The scent of the poet's narcissus, heavy and
intoxicating, filled nostrils and brain with its overpowering savour;
the roses already inclined to droop added their faded fragrance to the
air, mingling, too, with the penetrating odour of white Roman hyacinths
and the pungent smell of primroses and of violas, whilst through it
all the heavy fumes of incense rose upwards to the high-vaulted roof
and wrapped the statues of saints, the small side altars and tall
embroidered banners in their mystery-creating clouds.

Monseigneur the Archbishop of Paris had just entered, robed in gorgeous
cope and mitre and followed by the clergy of St. Gervais and the band
of acolytes clad in scarlet and white. Behind heavy curtains, a band of
skilled musicians from His Majesty's own opera house were playing an
Introit from one of M. Lulli's most exquisite scores.

All necks were craned to catch sight of the man and woman who were
kneeling on crimson cushions at the foot of the chancel steps.

The bride could scarce be seen though her figure looked dainty in her
simple white gown; but her golden head was hidden beneath a filmy veil
of delicate Mechlin lace, which fell right over her face and far back
to the edge of her gown.

But every one could see milor well, for his dark head towered above
those of the spectators. And he held his head very erect, some folk
thinking that on this occasion a man should look less proud and
certainly less defiant. He was gorgeously clad in surcoat and vest of
delicate ivory-tinted silk, with exquisite embroideries of gold and
silver which the gaffers thought must have cost a mint of money. But
then English milors were all so rich, and this one--so 'twas said--was
one of the richest amongst all; he certainly was one of the most
handsome. Goodly to look at was the verdict of the women, with his dark
hair innocent of those monstrous perruques which the _jeunesse dorée_
of Paris and Versailles had lately affected. He wore neither beard nor
moustache and every one could see what a firm, strong mouth and jaw he
had--an obstinate one murmured some of the ladies, a masterful one,
sighed the others.

Mme. de Montespan enthroned on a velvet-covered armchair made vain
attempts to draw his dark, deep-set eyes to hers.

But milor looked straight before him, and his arms were crossed over
his broad chest. When Monseigneur kneeled at the foot of the altar
and began to recite the first verse of the Introibe, milor knelt too,
beside his bride, and buried his face in his hands.

M. and Mme. Legros clad in their Sunday best, knelt quite close to the
bridal pair. Maman in rich puce-coloured brocade, her scanty locks
hidden beneath a remarkable confection of lace was frequently mopping
her eyes, the while M. Legros, master tailor to the Court of Paris,
tried to conceal the inordinate pride which he felt at seeing his only
child wedded to so great a lord.

Now Monseigneur bent his broad shoulders and sotto voce murmured the
Confiteor. Rose Marie in the innocence of her heart prayed to the
Virgin to make her quite, quite perfect, as good as my lord thought her
to be, lest he be deceived and disappointed in her. She had not spoken
to him alone again after that happy yet sad quarter of an hour when she
had seen his proud head bent before her, and felt that unutterable pity
for him, which so quickly then became unutterable love.

That his self-accusations were only the result of an over-sensitive
conscience she firmly believed, and if in his early youth my lord
had sinned as other young men sin from thoughtlessness and want of a
guiding hand, who was she that she should judge him, now that he had
honoured her with his love?

And as Monseigneur at the altar read the Holy Gospel wherein the Good
God himself enjoins man and woman to cleave to one another, Rose
Marie's whole heart went out to the man by her side, and the magnetism
of her enthusiastic sacrifice of her whole self to him drew his dark
eyes down to hers.

Michael, as in a dream, saw the exquisite white-clad figure close to
him; never--he thought--had he beheld aught so lovely, so pure, so
worthy of love. Then looking from her to the great altar before him, he
saw through the moving clouds of incense phantom figures and objects
from out his past.

There in that dark recess, beside the niche of that mitred saint,
faces of men who had sneered at his misfortunes, the men of law who
had plundered him, and a forest of outstretched palms, oily and
smooth awaiting the bribes. There again high up in the groined roof,
his companions in those far-off days in Flanders, faces red with the
excesses of the day, hands soiled with the evil deeds of night; the
miserable camp followers in the wake of a starving mercenary army,
dissolute men and intemperate women; and all around him the poor,
miserable scum of London, the men with whom he had herded, beasts like
himself, no more human since wretchedness had killed all manhood in
that perpetual, that degrading search after forgetfulness.

All these monsters and ghoulish phantoms grinned at Michael now,
polluting the sacred edifice with their imaginary presence. They
floated corpse-like on the shifting clouds of the ever-rising incense
and taunted Michael with their grinning faces, daring him now to turn
from the broad path of happiness whither the snow-white hand of an
ignorant girl was so trustingly leading him.

"Follow the path of honour, follow truth and loyalty now, Michael,
and to-morrow thou'lt be one of us again: one with the grinning
and dishonest sceptics, one with the profligate crowd of mercenary
soldiers, one with the flotsam and jetsam of criminal London, the
drunkards, the roisterers, God's damned upon earth. Truth leads the way
to perdition, follow truth now, Michael, an you can."

And as, up high on the altar steps, Monseigneur now held up for the
adoration of the multitude the sacred mysteries which no brain of man
can understand, Michael bowing his head and looking within himself with
searching, conscience-stricken eyes, saw nothing but loyalty to the
girl who was thus unwittingly snatching him from out the yawning abyss
of misery and degradation, of humiliation for himself and starvation
for his mother.

Anon Monseigneur whispered the Pater Noster, and after that he
turned and with hand upheld, three fingers pointing upwards to the
mystery-hidden vault, he pronounced the solemn benediction on Michael
Kestyon and Rose Marie his wife. Not a sound stirred in the vast and
ancient church, save the voice of the Archbishop as it rose high above
the chancel, and the blessing spoken by him seemed to descend with
unseen wings on the bowed heads of the two young people whom so strange
a fate was linking together.

To her--the girl--it was a Sacrament--this confirmation of the vows
spoken in her name when she was too young even to lisp them; for him it
was the word of honour of a man who throughout a rough life had never
succeeded in burying honour out of sight.

Both pronounced their vows without thought of ever rebelling against
them. Both pronounced the solemn "I will" with fervour as well as
gladness. The assistants almost held their breath. Instinctive awe had
silenced every chattering tongue, stilled every careless laugh.

My lord's voice rang out clear and distinct in the midst of that hushed
reverence, and more than one fair dame accustomed to the insipid
gallantries of the Court of Versailles sighed for the latent and rugged
passion which rang out through that firm "I will."

Rose Marie's young heart gave a great leap for joy.

"He loves me," she whispered exultantly to herself, despite the
solemnity of the moment, the sacredness of her surroundings, "he loves
me, he loves me. I can tell it by the sound of his voice."

And she had to press her bouquet of roses to her lips to suppress
the little cry of joy which almost escaped her throat. Perhaps she
did not altogether understand at this moment what she herself meant
when she thought "he loves me!" Mayhap some of those ladies in the
stiff brocades, who cast admiring glances at my lord knew and guessed
much more of what went on in his mind than did the simple tradesman's
daughter with the innocent mind and the pure heart of childhood still
undefiled within her.

And now Monseigneur came right down the altar steps and my lord and
Rose Marie had to rise, and to pass through the wrought-iron gates of
the rood screen, then pause, standing just below the communion rail.
Monseigneur stood there awaiting them, and the good curé of St. Gervais
was near him holding a jewelled salver whereon rested two circlets
of gold. My lord took one of these between his fingers and some one
whispered in Rose Marie's ear to hold out her hand.

From far away came in sweet muffled sounds the opening bars of Lulli's
Beati Omnes exquisitely played on the string instruments. All round
Rose Marie's feet lay a carpet of white roses which sent their last
dying fragrance into the air. She felt my lord's strong hand grasping
her own and the tiny band of gold being slipped on her finger--the sign
of her bondage to her lord; she was so happy that she could have cried
for joy, so happy that she longed to kiss that cold little circlet
which now irrevocably bound her to him.

She raised her eyes and saw his dark head bent just over her hand, and
it seemed as if a magnetic fluid ran from his veins into hers, for she
felt the passion which quivered in his pulse, and though she might not
wholly understand it as yet, she nevertheless responded to it with all
the strength of her young nature full of the joy of love and of life.

"May the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob be with you
and remain with you always."

Monseigneur had begun to speak the final prayer. Bride and bridegroom
had partaken of the Sacrament together, and Monseigneur had declared
that the other sacrament, that of matrimony, had indissolubly now
renewed the ties which already bound them to one another since
childhood. This was not a marriage, he said, but the repetition of
solemn vows made in their name when they were too young to understand,
the consecration by the Church of those bonds which she forged for them
eighteen years ago.

The solemn Amen was pronounced and sung; the King's musicians played
the first bars of a stirring wedding march specially composed for this
great occasion by Maître Colasse of His Majesty's orchestra. There was
a general movement amongst the spectators, a great sigh of excited
satisfaction as Monseigneur having stood for a few moments whispering
final admonitions to milor, now turned and walked with slow steps out
through the chancel door.

One by one the glittering group of gorgeously-clad priests and acolytes
disappeared out through the narrow opening. The strains of the hidden
orchestra swelled in glorious volume until they filled every corner
of the vast building, like a pæan of triumph and of joy. There was a
general frou-frou of silken skirts, a clink of swords, a scraping of
chairs against the flagged floor, as my lord now led his young bride
down the nave. He pressed her trembling hand against his side, the
while he frowned--despite himself--at this crowd of peering faces,
this sea of importunate looks which made him restive and impatient.
He longed to take his snowdrop away with him, out of this indifferent
throng, far, far away to some hidden nook among the Kentish hills,
there where the lime trees were just beginning to unfold their
delicate leaves of emerald tinged with gold, where lying on a carpet
of primroses and violets, beneath a cool, grey sky, his burning head
fanned by the cold, spring breezes, he could kneel at her feet and tell
her that with her small icy tendrils she had already twined herself
around his heart; that her blue eyes, cold and pure as those of a
forget-me-not beside a brook, had taught the miserable reprobate his
first lesson of love.

Then when the pale tints of the limes turned to a more vivid green,
when primroses had paled beneath the shadows of brilliant Lent lilies,
then he would try his hand at the great miracle of which he dreamed,
the transmutation of the white snowdrop into a glowing, crimson rose.




                             CHAPTER XXII

                 Sometimes lurk I in a gossip's bowl.
                                 --A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.


"By the Mass, but the blackguard bears himself bravely! And you, my
lord, have no cause to be ashamed of your substitute."

It was Lord Rochester who spoke. He, together with Lord Stowmaries
and Sir John Ayloffe, was standing on the top of the steps beneath
the ancient stone portcullis which surmounts the porch. They formed a
compact little group, which gained distinction from the rest of the
motley throng, by the sober cut of the English-made clothes, and by the
drooping plumes of the hats--a fashion long since discarded in France.

Michael Kestyon with his bride on his arm had just come out of the
church. She, wrapped in cloak and hood--for the spring day was chilly
and the east wind keen--looked little more for the moment than a small
bundle of humanity desirous above all of escaping observation.

But Michael for all the world looked the picture of the soldier of
fortune, defiant and conscious of danger, ready to walk straight into
that yawning abyss, at the bottom of which lurks a mysterious death,
yet disdainful to evade it, too proud to halt, too obstinate to turn
back.

As he came out of the porch, a violent gust of wind caught the folds of
his cloak, and lashed him in the face, whipping up the swiftly-coursing
blood which the solemnity of the religious service, the drowsy
influence of faded roses had lulled into temporary somnolence. The
glare of the young April sun dazzled him, after the sombre, grey tones
of the majestic chancel; the pupils of his eyes contracted to a pin's
point, making the eyes themselves seem pale in colour, and tawny as
those of a wild beast sweeping the desert with great savage orbs. There
was altogether for the moment in the man's expression a strange look of
dreamy aloofness. His eyes wandered over the crowd but obviously they
recognised no individual face.

No wonder that Lord Rochester--essentially a man himself and a despiser
of the other sex--gazed with ungrudging admiration at this splendid
blackguard, who bore the stamp of virility on every line of his massive
frame, and who seemed to defy contempt and dare contumely to reach him.
Looking at Michael now it seemed impossible to think that he could ever
regret any action which he had set his mind to do. Compunction is for
the weak who is led astray, who fears gibes and dreads humiliation, but
this man had donned an armour of pride and of ruthless ambition which
neither sneers nor contempt could ever penetrate.

He might be a blackguard--he was one by every code of moral or
religious civilisation, but in his most evil moments he was never
paltry and never vile.

"I feel no longer any sorrow for the girl," continued Lord Rochester
after awhile. "Odd's fish! Were I a woman I would not complain at the
bridegroom. And withal she looked vastly pleasing as a bride, and
methinks Michael Kestyon, too, is overmuch in luck's way. What say you,
Ayloffe? are you not grieved that you did not take the entire business
on your own shoulders, rather than depute that good-looking young
reprobate to earn a fortune and an exquisite bride to boot?"

Sir John frowned. Some thought, such as the one expressed by Rochester,
had mayhap crossed his own mind during the past three weeks--but this
was not for other people to see. He, too, watched Michael's tall
retreating figure, as he led Rose Marie down the stone steps, giving
it ungrudging admiration and also the tribute of secret envy, until a
crowd of friends and servants closed in round the bridal pair and hid
them both from view.

Then Sir John turned to his friends and said drily:

"My lord of Rochester is ever ready for a joke. I desired this scheme
to succeed, and obviously the worthy tailor yonder would never have
mistaken me for a man who was seven years old eighteen years ago.
But I'll confess, an it'll please you, my lord and also my lord of
Stowmaries, that I do deem Michael Kestyon a lucky dog. One hundred and
twenty thousand pounds and such a bride! By Gad, had I been able to put
back the hand of time some twenty years--"

"The bride would have loathed you," retorted Stowmaries with an
unpleasant snarl. "She'll fall in love with Michael and clear me of
remorse."

"Surely my lord of Stowmaries is not troubled with any such
unpleasantness?" said Ayloffe imperturbably. "'Tis too late now to give
way to remorse. By to-morrow's dawn, my lord, you'll be as free as
air to wed whom you please. That simpering tailor's daughter will not
have a rag of reputation left to her name, and you can repudiate her
whenever you feel so inclined."

"And that will be at once," replied Stowmaries, who, of a truth, was
not experiencing the slightest pricks of conscience. The thought of
this mock wedding which he had actually witnessed to-day had been
dwelling in his mind for close upon a month. He had envisaged it from
every point of view and had completely exonerated himself from blame
in the matter. The image of his fair Julia had quite succeeded in
screening from his mental vision all thought of the unfortunate girl
whom he was thus condemning to disgrace and to shame, and whilst he
steadily looked on Michael as a miserable blackguard he firmly believed
that when once he had paid over the price of an innocent girl's
betrayal he himself would remain absolutely free from blame.

"I have made all enquiries," now continued Sir John drawing his two
friends out of earshot of the crowd. "I understand that there are to
be rare doings to-day in Master the tailor's back shop--a banquet,
dancing and I imagine a good deal of wine drinking and licentious
entertainment. These French bourgeois have no knowledge of decency and
Michael Kestyon, methinks, did not learn to be squeamish whilst herding
with the scum of mercenary armies in Flanders and Brandenburg. At
five o'clock however a coach is to take the bridal pair as far as St.
Denis--"

He paused a moment, then added with a cynical smile, almost cruel in
its callousness:

"The first stage of their journey to Havre."

Lord Rochester laughed loudly. He had all along only seen the humour of
the adventure. A woman's reputation destroyed, a woman won by a trick,
by Gad! these were of every-day occurrence in the life of a fashionable
gentleman. Indeed he thought that both Stowmaries and Ayloffe were
making far too much of the whole business, and though he, too, called
Michael Kestyon a rogue, yet he admired him for his pluck and envied
him for his good fortune.

In his heart of hearts he much regretted that on the memorable night
when the adventure was proposed, he had been too drunk to accept its
terms or to enter the lists for it himself.

"Nay then!" he said lustily, "we'll all call on the turtle doves at St.
Denis to-night, and whilst my lord of Stowmaries pays up like a man for
all that he gains by Michael's roguery, Sir John Ayloffe and I will
entertain the bride by hoodwinking her still further into the belief
that she is of a truth Countess of Stowmaries forever and ever Amen, as
the Archbishop told her this day."

"I should be glad to get to St. Denis to-night," rejoined Stowmaries.
"I owe Michael seventy thousand pounds, which according to promise I
should pay him to-day. The draft for it on Master Vivish the goldsmith
is in my pocket now. The sooner I am rid of it the more pleased will I
be."

"Then will I at once and see about a coach," said Sir John. "We can
make a start at about six o'clock, one hour after the dove hath flown
out of the paternal cote."

"Nay, old Daniel Pye will see about the coach," rejoined Stowmaries.
"He hath met a crony who speaks English and knows his way about Paris
better than we do. He'll get us what we want."

"Daniel Pye!" exclaimed Sir John in astonishment. "What doth my
kinswoman's faithful henchman in this depraved city?"

"Mistress Julia Peyton desired him to do certain commissions for
her here in Paris. When she heard that I was making the journey she
requested that I should allow her servant to travel in the company of
my men, since he was unversed in foreign ways, and knew nothing of the
French language."

Sir John made no further comment, but he wondered vaguely in his mind
as to why the fair Julia had sent old Pye over to Paris. The question
of commissions was of course nonsense. Daniel could no more choose a
length of silk or even of grogram, than he could trim a lace coif or
fashion a pinner.

"Mayhap my fair coz is jealous," was Sir John's mental comment and the
conclusion to which he arrived with that convenient cynicism of his,
with which he usually disposed of any problem wherein feminine motives
or feminine actions played an important part. "She hath mayhap deputed
that old sinner, Daniel Pye, to watch over young Stowmaries and to make
report in case the wiles of this wicked city make my lord forget his
allegiance to herself."

Thus content with his own explanation of the circumstance, Sir John
dismissed the old serving-man from his mind, but not without deciding
to question Pye closely as soon as he had an opportunity so to do.

Most of the crowd had dispersed by now. The bridal pair with good M.
and Mme. Legros were being escorted by a merry crowd of 'prentices,
servants and friends as far as the worthy tailor's house in the Rue
de l'Ancienne Comédie. This cortège had already turned the angle
of the street, and the noise of laughter and of songs sung to the
accompaniment of flute and _hautbois_ was gradually dying away in the
distance.

The few laggards who remained behind were discussing the chief actors
in the pageant which they had witnessed. Mme. de Montespan and her
gaily chattering court were gossiping whilst waiting for their chaises.

"Ah!" sighed Madame provokingly, "are all these English milors as
handsome as that? I vow our gallants of Versailles have much to learn
from them, if indeed they all look like milor of Stowmaries."

And while the gallants there present protested in dismay an
ill-concealed jealousy, Madame's roving eyes had discovered the small
group of Englishmen close by, and amongst them had recognised Lord
Rochester.

"Ah, milor," she exclaimed, "I pray you approach. I did not know you
were in Paris! What brings you hither, I pray?"

Lord Rochester, obedient to the call, had already advanced, and was
duly allowed to kiss those finger tips whereon royal lips were ever
wont to linger. Englishmen were in high favour with Madame for the next
half hour at least.

"Why are you in Paris?" she repeated.

"To catch a glimpse of the most beautiful woman in Europe," replied my
lord of Rochester with bold gallantry.

"Then you'll come see her in Versailles," she replied, drinking in the
full measure of his flattering speech, the obvious falseness of which
would not have deceived a child.

"Nay, now that I have seen her!" he retorted, "I must hie me home to
England again."

"So soon! Then why did you come? Nay!" she added with mock severity,
"Do not repeat your pretty lie again. You could not imagine to see
me in this old church to-day. I came out of curiosity, to see this
strange, ill-assorted marriage. Tell me what makes the rich Earl of
Stowmaries wed a tailor's daughter?"

"He was not always rich, nor always Earl of Stowmaries. The ceremony
was not a marriage. It was a confirmation."

"And you came to witness it?"

"And to take part in an adventure."

"I might have guessed. Who is the lady?"

"The bride of half an hour ago."

"I do not understand," said Mme. de Montespan with a frown. "Pray
explain."

"I'll do even more than that, Madame la Marquise," retorted Lord
Rochester as he stepped a little to one side and disclosed the person
of my lord of Stowmaries. "I will with your permission present to
you my friend the Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, the _only_ Earl
of Stowmaries whom I or His Majesty the King of England would ever
acknowledge as such."

The Marquise looked very bewildered, her great violet-hued eyes opened
wide and wandered in puzzlement from the face of Lord Rochester to that
of his friend.

"The only Earl of Stowmaries!" she exclaimed in astonishment. "I vow
milor that you have vastly puzzled me. Then who was that handsome young
milor who just now swore to love the tailor's daughter, the while the
hearts of two Duchesses, and one other Marquise besides myself were
pining for his glance."

My lord of Rochester, however, kept Madame on the tenter-hooks of
expectation, whilst he affected the elaborate presentation of his
friend which the etiquette of the time demanded. He introduced my lord
of Stowmaries to Madame la Marquise de Montespan, and performed a like
service for Sir John Ayloffe. Then only did he partly satisfy Madame's
curiosity.

"The young reprobate," he said airily, "whom the most beautiful
Marquise in Christendom has honoured with a glance of her Myosotis eyes
is--well! just a young reprobate, whom my lord of Stowmaries here is
paying handsomely to take an unwelcome bride from off his shoulders.
My lord of Stowmaries was seven years old when he wedded the tailor's
daughter--now he has other matrimonial views--also a handsome cousin
who was not averse to stepping into his shoes for this occasion which
we have all witnessed to-day. He'll be well paid--neither bride nor
bridegroom will have much to complain of--the bridegroom was a wastrel
ere my lord of Stowmaries proposed this adventure--and the bride is
only a tailor's daughter. She will have a handsome husband, if Michael
Kestyon chooses to acknowledge her--if not there is always the nunnery
handy for those saintly women like herself who have made a temporary
if not wholly voluntary diversion from the strict paths of decorum and
virtue. Et puis voila!"

Mme. de Montespan had listened attentively to this tale so cynically
told; her friends, too, had closed in round her. Every one was vastly
interested and I assure you not the least in the world shocked. The
Court of le Roi Soleil abounded in such adventures, the convents of
France were filled with the grief-stricken victims of the dissolute
idlers of the day. Lord Rochester's story evoked nothing but amusement,
and Lord Stowmaries at once became the centre of an admiring little
crowd.

"But par ma foi!" commented Madame with a sigh not altogether free from
envy, "you English gentlemen are mighty blackguards!"

"We do our best, Madame," rejoined Rochester lightly, "to emulate our
confrères in France."

"His Majesty shall hear of your gallantries this very night. I
pray you, Lord Rochester, do not leave us yet, nor you, my lord of
Stowmaries, nor you, Sir Ayloffe. His Majesty would delight in your
company. He so loves a bold adventure. And I am much mistaken he'll
wish to see our handsome young reprobate, too--Michael Kestyon, did you
say?" she added, prettily mispronouncing the English vowels, "'tis an
ugly name--but oh! he hath fine eyes and a manly bearing--and did he
really do it for money?"

She called Lord Stowmaries to her side and closely questioned him,
until she knew the entire discreditable story from beginning to
end. Her amusement in the recital of the tale, her appreciation of
the adorable wickedness which had prompted the scheme for the cruel
hoodwinking of another woman, did much to dissipate once and for all
any lingering thoughts of remorse which Stowmaries may still have been
troubled with.

Nothing would do but the imperious beauty's decree that after the call
at St. Denis--which was the call of honour since it meant the paying
of money for services rendered--the three English gentlemen must
straightway back to Versailles, where they would be sure of a cordial
welcome from His Majesty and from every lady and gentleman at his Court.

"And," urged Madame, when at last she was installed in her chaise and
was bidding farewell to her array of courtiers, "if you can bring that
adorable young blackguard with you, you'll earn a gratified smile from
the lips of King Louis, and I'll promise not to do more than turn his
head and make him forget that he was paid in order to wed the daughter
of a tailor--brrr--the thought makes me shudder. The rogue is an
Apollo, milors, else a Hercules--and has just that wicked look which
makes us poor women tremble and which we adore."

And with this parting shot levelled at those who would have fought to
the death for praise such as this, Madame ordered her serving-men to
bear her away.

Rochester, satisfied that he had sown the seeds of the most amusing
and most comprehensive piece of scandal that had ever amused the
jaded monarchs of two rival kingdoms, turned to his friends for final
approval. Ayloffe was distinctly appreciative of the new move, but
Stowmaries with that shiftiness peculiar to weak characters was not
quite sure if it had been premature.

Anyhow the draft for seventy thousand pounds on Master Vivish seemed
to burn a hole in the pocket of his elegant surcoat. He was longing to
be rid of all obligations in the matter, firmly convinced as he was
when he had made Michael richer by one hundred and twenty thousand
pounds and himself poorer by that vast sum, this tiresome feeling of
uncertainty would leave him, and he could once more enjoy life in its
full--life with the prospect of adorable Mistress Julia as a constant
companion by his side.

He and his friends walked back to the hostelry where they had put up
for the night. There Stowmaries called for Daniel Pye in order to give
him instructions about getting a coach ready for the trip to St. Denis.

But it seems that Daniel had gone out earlier in the day and no one
knew whither he had gone. But there was no difficulty about the coach.
The amiable host of the uncomfortable little inn assured MM. les milors
that one would be ready by half-past five of the clock and that the
journey to St. Denis could be accomplished in something less than three
hours.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

           The man was my whole world all the same
           With his flowers to praise or his weeds to blame
           And either or both to love.
                                                      --BROWNING.


The workshop of Master Legros, tailor-in-chief to His Majesty the King
of France, had been transformed into a vast assembly-room. The big
central tables whereon usually sat cross-legged the 'prentices and
stitchers, had been pushed to one side, right along the wall where
it now groaned beneath the weight of pasties, and of pies, of a lamb
roasted whole, of dishes of marrow bones, of prawns and of cheese,
amongst which dishes and platters, the bottles of good Burgundy and of
wine of Navarre, and the jugs of metheglin and hypocras reared their
enticing heads.

The centre of the room was given over to dancing. The wooden floor had
been greased and polished until it had become slippery to the feet,
whilst in a corner raised upon a wooden platform covered with crimson
cloth a band of musicians were playing good lilting, swinging measures
for a dance. None of your simpering minuets or slow-going pavanes for
these young people; but something with a good lively tune in it, and
plenty of noise and banging of the small drum and cymbal, so that
a youngster could have a chance of gripping a wench well round the
waist and of turning her round and round until she became so giddy, so
breathless and so hot that she had to cry for mercy even at the price
of a sounding kiss.

For close upon an hour now the musicians had played the same rousing
tune, and for close upon an hour indefatigable feet--some clad in shoe
leather, others with hard bare soles beating the polished floor--had
been raising up a mighty cloud of dust which settled on pasties and on
cheese, on the big drum and on perspiring faces. Cheeks were crimson
from the exertion, short hair and long hair, curly and straight hung
limply over sweating, greasy foreheads. Pinners were getting awry,
displaying more bosom than prudery would otherwise allow. To right and
left surcoats and vests were being cast aside and flung across the room
leaving bare arms and chests to view, or else a shirt more full of
tatters than of stitches.

Daylight still came streaming in for it was only four o'clock and
_les mariés_ would not be leaving for at least another hour. In the
meanwhile M. Legros had much ado to keep the curious, the idle, the
impertinent from his doorstep, for, look you! though the hospitable
abode of the goodly tailor was open on this great occasion to all and
sundry friends and acquaintances who wished to eat and drink and to
make merry, yet there was no intention of permitting every shiftless
vagabond to come and partake of the cheer.

Good Papa Legros had planted two of his most stalwart assistants at the
door, with orders to admit no one who did not bear a familiar face, and
if any one prove importunate, why then the end of a whip-lash or even a
stout stick should drive impudence away.

Thus it was that when Master Daniel Pye--the faithful henchman of fair
Mistress Peyton--presented himself at the tailor's shop in the Rue de
l'Ancienne Comédie, he was incontinently refused admittance.

"I desire to speak with M. Legros, tailor to His Majesty the King of
France," growled Daniel Pye in excessively bad French, for he knew
nothing of the gibberish and had only learnt this phrase off by heart
like a parrot that jabbers without understanding.

"Then thou silly lout of a buffle-headed Englishman, thou'lt have to
wait with thy desire until to-morrow."

"I desire to speak with M. Legros, tailor to His Majesty the King of
France," repeated Pye mechanically. It was the only sentence which he
knew, and he had been assured by his crony that the magic phrase would
ope the doors for him without any difficulty.

"Get thee gone, and come back to-morrow," retorted the stalwart
sentinel.

"I desire to speak with--"

"An thou'lt not go at once," shouted the tailor's irascible cutter,
"I'll give thee a taste of a French stick across thy English shoulders."

"I desire--"

Bang! came the stout stick crashing down on worthy Pye's broad back,
quickly bent in order to check the strength of the blow.

But he held his ground.

"Thou'lt go to Paris in company with my lord," the mistress had said
to him peremptorily, "and on the day on which the daughter of Master
Legros, tailor-in-chief to His Majesty the King of France weds an
English gentleman, thou'lt to the house of that same Master Legros, and
thou'lt deliver him this letter--to him and to no one else--and without
saying whence thou comest, nor who it was that sent thee. Thou'lt go to
him one hour after the religious ceremony of matrimony shall have been
performed in the church and before the newly-wedded pair have quitted
the bride's parental home."

Daniel Pye had presented himself according to instructions. He had
safely hidden in his breast pocket the letter which he was to deliver
to the tailor of his Majesty the King of France, and to no one else. If
he failed in the discharge of his duty, he knew that his fair mistress
would punish him mercilessly, probably dismiss him from her service
altogether and send him--old and unfit for other work--to starve in his
remote East Anglian village.

At best there were plenty of subordinates in Mistress Peyton's
household who would only too gladly wield the lash on him who never
spared it to others. Therefore Daniel Pye held his ground. The more
blows he received, the more sure would he be of the indulgence of his
own mistress. He had a tough hide, and after all is said and done, one
does not die of a beating. So he bore the blows of the stick on his
back, and the stinging swish of whipcord round his legs. He knew quite
well that on occasions such as marriage-feasts or other merrimaking
days, 'prentices and young assistants would have their bit of fun.

He had had his own many a time. So when his back ached overmuch, and
his legs were more sore than he could stand, he gave up all further
attempts to force his way into the house and beat a retreat in the rear
of the good-natured crowd.

He would, he thought, find a means to speak to Master Legros a little
later on, when every one's attention would be more fully concentrated
on merrimaking, and the door was not so closely guarded.

When Papa Legros heard of the incident he was vastly amused, then he
bethought himself that mayhap the persistent English lout had some
command for him for some rich clothes on behalf of one or other of the
elegant milors who were in Paris at this moment--friends of my Lord
Stowmaries, mayhap. Master Legros was vastly perturbed, and sent one
of his 'prentices to search for the Englishman in the crowd, and to
bring him hither forthwith. But Master Daniel Pye with that stolidity
peculiar to his race had gone very quietly off to a neighbouring coffee
house to nurse his sores, to drink mulled ale and to await events.

In the meanwhile within the house itself much time had been spent in
eating and drinking, as the debris which at this hour littered Mme.
Legros' kitchen could well testify. The banquet had lasted for nearly
two hours and had gone on at intervals ever since. M. Legros had made
a speech which had caused his fair young daughter to blush and made
every one there clap mugs against the table and shout: "Long live! long
live!" until the old rafters and beams shook with the mighty echo.

One or two buxom maids of all work, with muscular, bare arms and
streaming, red faces had since then brought in fresh relays of
victuals, and any number of bottles of wine--quite enough for every
'prentice in the shop to get as drunk as any lord.

The noise in the back shop was now incessant and the shouting of
the dancers, the screams of the girls, the laughing and hooting
of the boys, almost drowned the cymbal, _hautbois_ and big drum.
The intoxication of pleasure had whipped up the blood of all these
youngsters. Ay! and of the sober folk, too, for behold Mme. Legros in
her beautiful puce silk footing it with good M. Dumas, the shoesmith,
and displaying a length of stockinged leg such as no decent matron
should show except to her husband.

But what would you? This is an occasion such as only occurs once
in a lifetime: the marriage of an only daughter, and that to the
handsomest, richest, most noble seigneur that ever dwelt at the Court
of the King of England.

Then _vogue la galère_! Let us dance and make merry! Dance until every
sinew in the body aches and clothes slip off dripping shoulders.

"_Mais va donc! vieille tortue!_" shouted some of the young 'prentices
to the musicians as these poor wretches, perspiring profusely,
straining their arms and puffing out their cheeks tried to keep up the
measure to the required rapidity.

"_C'est un enterrement par Dieu!_" yelled another, as he whirled his
partner round until both her little feet gave way and she and the
indefatigable youth collapsed with a violent thud upon the hard floor.

A terrific shout of laughter greeted the catastrophe. The musicians,
in response to vigorous shouts, struck up the measure with renewed
quickness. They blew and puffed at such a rate now that no foot of man
could have kept up with the tune, at least not after an hour of this
same exertion.

"Assez! assez! not so fast morbleu!"

But the players evidently had resented the previous comments anent
their slowness, and now would listen to no admonition in the contrary
direction. Faster and faster they played, the exhausted, sweating
'prentices tripped it with frantic efforts; the girls loudly clamoured
for the music to stop. They were giddy, they were toweringly hot, the
young men's breath almost burned their cheeks.

"Enough! enough! _par tous les diables!_ These musicians have the devil
in them!"

The couples fell back one by one panting against the wall, only one
pair remained in the centre now twirling and twisting in a cloud of
dust. The girl's white skirts flew out all round her like a thousand
wings which seemed to lift her off her feet. The man held her tightly,
his strong arms twined round her as if he never would let her go
again, but meant to dance and turn, to whirl her through space even to
eternity.

His head was bent for he was over-tall and towered above every one else
in the room. He was a head taller than she was, but he looked straight
down at her as he held her, straight into her eyes, those beautiful
blue eyes of hers which he had thought so cold. They were dark now,
almost as dark as his own, and flashed with curious purple lights,
and deep velvety shadows; her lips were parted with the effort of
breathing, they were red and full, and showed glimpses of small pearly
teeth, and the red moist tongue between them.

The man's heart gave a great bound of joy. This was no ice-maiden
wrapped in a mantle of snow, the tips of whose chaste fingers he had
hitherto hardly dared to touch with his lips. No! this was a living,
breathing woman full of passion, full of the joy of life, a woman
moreover who was ready to love him, to return passion for passion, and
kiss for kiss.

Ye gods! Michael, but thou'rt a happy man!

He held her close in his arms, for is not God's most glorious, most
perfect creation upon earth a woman who is pure the while she burns
with passion? And that priceless treasure was his. Fate had given her
to him, Fate and his own damnable action.

Nay, Michael, thou blackguard, if thine action be damnable, then by all
the Saints in Heaven and by all the devils in Hell, do thou go and be
damned, but hold this woman first.

And wild, mad thoughts went coursing through his brain, thoughts of
himself and of her:

"I am a man, and what I do, I do. With mine honour did I buy thee, with
mine own humiliation and shame have I conquered thee. Thou who art no
snow-maiden but living lava melting at my touch, thou whom I adore,
for whom were it to be done again, I would lie and I would cheat, I
would descend to Hell or conquer paradise. I am a man and what I do, I
do! Perish honour, perish life itself and eternal salvation if to gain
honour mean to forsake thee."

These were the tumultuous coursings of his excited brain the while he
held her thus, swirling and whirling in his arms, swaying as a reed in
the embrace of a blasting wind.

The cloud of dust enveloped them, as, on the Brocken, the steam from
unseen cauldrons envelops the witches in their revels. Through this
haze Rose Marie saw nothing but his face and in it she read mayhap
something that was passing in his mind, something of that passion which
her mind as yet could not understand, even though her blood and heart
were so ready to respond.

But strangely enough she was not afraid. The child whose life boundary
did not extend far beyond the walls of the parental home looked out on
a limitless horizon of men's passions and men's sins, but even beyond
that horizon the personality of the man to whom she had given her
innocent love stood out clear and pure: the master to obey, the hero to
worship. That she had roused a great love in him, she could not fail
to see; of that she was proud, for her feminine instinct whispered
that the greatness of his love transcended any sin which he ever might
commit.

       *       *       *       *       *

How it all happened she never afterwards could say; but it was all so
different to what had been prearranged by mother and father, and by
all the friends. Rose Marie had not heard the pawing of horse's hoofs
outside, nor yet the rumble of the coach. Truth to tell she was so lost
in the wild dream of the moment that she had forgotten all about what
was to come: the farewell to maman and papa, the noisy "good-bye" to
friends, the conventional departure accompanied by shouts and cheers
and showers of rose leaves which all richly-dowered brides have to
experience.

In her case, too, it had all been duly planned, but it happened so
differently!

She had been dancing with her lord, looking up like a fascinated bird
into his face glowing with ardent love. Then the room began to spin
round and round, she could see nothing very clearly, yet a delicious
languor stole into her every limb, she closed her eyes, and gave
herself over limp and motionless into his embrace. Suddenly she felt
herself lifted off her feet and carried by strong protecting arms
through door and passage, until the cold April wind struck her cheeks
and forced her with the power of his frolicsome will to open her eyes
once more. She saw as in a quick vision a rearing horse, two or three
men in sad-coloured surcoats, one of whom clung to the horse's bridle,
whilst the other held the stirrup, and then as a background of curious
faces the crowd of street gaffers standing gaping round. Behind her the
dense throng of 'prentices and wenches, of friends and serving-maids
pressed forward down the narrow passage, shouting, clamouring cheering
to the echoes; in the forefront of these papa and maman half laughing,
half crying, waving hands and mopping tears.

But it was only a vision swift and sudden, for everything happened
so quickly--and she was still so dizzy with the frantic whirl of the
dance that she hardly remembered being lifted up on to the saddle and
landed safely in the strong arms of her lord. The words of command
had been so quickly spoken, my lord had jumped with such rapidity into
the saddle, no wonder that she did not know exactly how she came to be
where she was, clinging to him with all her might, and making herself
very, very small lest she hindered him in the guiding of his horse.

She knew exactly how to hold on, and how to sit, for she had oft sat
thus ere now, on her father's saddle when he took her with him for a
ride--he bent on some business errand, she enjoying the movement, and
the fresh air as soon as the grime and smoke of Paris had been left
behind.

But no other ride had ever been quite like this one, for soon the horse
settled down to an easy, swinging canter in the soft mud of the road,
and there was an infinite sense of security in the clasp of the sinewy
arm which held her so deliciously close.

Just one slight shifting of her lissome body to settle herself more
comfortably, one little movement which seemed to bring her yet a little
nearer to him.

"Is it well with you, my snowdrop?" he asked, bending his head in a
vain endeavour to catch sight of her face.

He only could see the top of a small, fair head, from which the hood
had slipped off, disclosing the wealth of quaint curls and puffs, the
formal bridal coiffure since then somewhat disarranged.

The wealth of curls shook in obvious assent, and presently a shy voice
murmured:

"Why do you call me snowdrop?"

"Because I was an ignorant fool," he replied, "when I first beheld you,
a blind and senseless lout who did not distinguish the lovely crimson
rose that hid so shyly within a borrowed mantle of ice."

"They call me Rose Marie," she whispered.

"Rosemary to me," he said fervently, "which is for remembrance."

"Tu m'aimes?" she asked, but so softly that whilst she wondered if he
would hear she almost hoped that the April breeze would fail to carry
her words to his ear.

Of course he did not reply. There is no answer to that exquisite
question when it is asked by the loved one's lips, but his right arm
tightened round her, until she felt almost crushed in the passionate
embrace.




                             CHAPTER XXIV

            Love that keeps all the choir of lives in chime
            Love that is blood within the veins of time.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


You all know that funny little inn at St. Denis, on what was then the
main road between Paris and Havre; it stands sheltered against north
and east winds by a towering bouquet of mighty oaks, which were there,
believe me--though mayhap not quite so gnarled and so battered by
storms of wind and thunder as they are now--in the April of that year
1678.

The upper story gabled and raftered hung then as now quite askew above
its lower companion, and the door even in those days was in perpetual
warfare with its own arched lintel, and refused to meet it in a spirit
of friendly propinquity. The Seine winds its turgid curves in the rear
of the building with nothing between it and the outer walls only the
tow path always ankle deep in mud.

The view out and across the winding river is only interesting to the
lover of colour and of space, for there are no romantic hills, no
rugged crags or fir-crowned plateaus to delight the eye. Only a few
melancholy acacias sigh and crackle in the wind and tall poplars rear
their majestic heads up to the vast expanse of sky.

Now elegant villas and well-trimmed gardens fill the space over which
two hundred and forty years ago the eye wandered seeking in vain for
signs of human habitation. Rank grass covered the earth, and close to
the water's edge clumps of reeds gave shelter to water rats and birds.

Through the small dormer window just beneath the gable, Michael Kestyon
looked out upon the melancholy landscape and found it exquisitely fair.

The wind howled down the wide chimney and sighed drearily through the
reeds, whereon the spring had not yet thrown her delicate tints of
green; but Michael thought the sound divine, for it mingled in his ear
with the tones of a fresh, young voice which had prattled gaily on
throughout supper-time, of past and of future--not of the present, for
that was sacred, too sacred even for her words.

She was a little tired at first, when he lifted her off the saddle,
and the amiable hostess of the ramshackle inn took charge of her and
saw to her comforts. But after a little rest in her room, she came and
joined him in the stuffy parlour, the window of which gave on that far
horizon, beyond which lay the sea, England and home.

She seemed a little scared when she found herself quite alone with him,
without maman or papa to interrupt the tête-à-tête. She was so young,
and oh! how tender and fragile she appeared to him, as she came forward
a little timidly, with great, blue eyes opened wide, wherein her pure
love fought with her timidity.

Her whole appearance, her expression of face as she yielded her hand to
him, and allowed him to draw her closer ever closer to his heart, made
appeal to all that was best, most humbly reverent within him.

Rose Marie was home to him, she was joy and she was peace, and he,
the homeless, the joyless, the insubordinate wastrel, felt a wave of
infinite tenderness, a tenderness which purified his love, and laid
ardent passion to rest.

He led her to the window, and throwing it wide open, he knelt down
beside her there in the embrasure. She sat on the narrow window seat,
looking out on that vast expanse of sky and land whereon the shadows
of evening had thrown a veil of exquisite sadness and peace. The bare
branches of the acacias as yet only tipped with tiny flecks of green
moaned softly beneath the kiss of the breezes. Banks of clouds lashed
into activity by the wind hurried swiftly past, out towards the unseen
ocean, now obscuring the moon, now revealing her magic beauty, more
transcendent and glorious after those brief spells of mystery conquered
and of darkness subdued. Michael said very little. There was so little
that he could say, which was not now a lie. He could not speak to her
of his home, for home to him had been a miserable garret under the
grimy roof of a house of disrepute, shared with others as miserable, as
homeless as himself. He could not speak to her of friends, for of these
he had none, only the depraved companions of a dissolute past, nor
could he speak of kindred, unless he told her that it was because his
mother was dying of hunger in a wretched hovel that he had spoken the
mighty lie and taken payment for speaking it.

I would not have you think that even now Michael felt any remorse for
what he had done. He was not a man to act first and blush for his
actions afterwards. He knew his action to be vile, but then he had
known that ere he committed it, and knowing it had deliberately taken
his course. Were it to be done all over again, he would do it; since
she never could be his save by the great lie and the monstrous trick,
then the lie must be spoken and the trick accomplished. For she meant
love and purification; she meant the re-awakening of all that was holy
in him and which the Creator infuses in every man be he cast into this
world in a gutter or upon a throne.

And he would make her happy, for he had gained her love, and a woman
such as she hath but one love to give. She would never have loved
Stowmaries, and not loving, she would have been unhappy. He had taken
upon himself the outer shell of another man, and that was all; just
another man's name, title and past history, nothing more. But it was
his personality which had conquered her, his love which had roused
hers. She loved--not an Earl of Stowmaries, the plighted husband of her
babyhood. No! she loved him, Michael, the blackguard, the liar, the
cheat an you will call him so; but she loved him, the man for all that.

Therefore he felt no remorse, when he knelt beside her and during that
exquisite hour of evening, when shadows flew across the moon, and the
acacias whispered fairy tales of love and of brave deeds, he listened
to her innocent prattle with a clear mind and a determined conscience,
and the while she spoke to him of her simple past life, of her books
and of her music, his ambition went galloping on into the land of
romance.

The title of Earl of Stowmaries which he had assumed, he could easily
win now; the riches, the position, everything that could satisfy a
woman's innocent vanity he would shower upon his snowdrop. She would
have all that her parents wished for her, all and more, for she would
have a husband who worshipped her, whose boundless love was built on
the secure foundation of a great and lasting gratitude.

It was in this same boundless gratitude that he kissed her hands now;
those little hands which had been the exquisite channels through which
had flown to him the pure waters of love and of happiness.

How quaint she looked, with her fair hair almost wild round her little
head. The dance first, then the ride through wind and space had
loosened most of the puffs and curls from their prearranged places.
That tired look round the eyes, the ring of dark tone which set off the
pearly whiteness of her skin, the beads of moisture on her forehead,
these gave her a strangely-pathetic air of frailty, which most
specially appealed to Michael's rugged strength.

Her white gown was torn here and there--Michael remembered catching
his foot in it in the mazes of the dance--it was crumpled, too, and
hung limply round her young figure, showing every delicate curve of the
childlike form, every rounded outline of budding womanhood.

Think you it was an easy task for Michael to keep his tempestuous
passion in check, he who throughout his life had known no control save
that of cruel necessity? Think you he did not long to take her in his
arms, to cover those sweet lips with kisses, to frighten her with
the overwhelming strength of his love and then to see fright slowly
changing to trust and the scared look give way beneath the hot wave of
passion.

But with all that mad desire coursing through brain and blood, Michael
knelt there at her feet, holding her hands, and listening to the flow
of talk which like a cooling stream rippled in his ear. She asked him
about England and about his home, and wanted to know if in springtime
the white acacias were in bloom in Sussex, and if rosemary--her
namesake--grew wild in the meadows.

In the woods round Fontainebleau the ground was carpeted with anemones;
were there such sweet white carpets in the English woods? Then she
looked about her in the ugly, uninteresting little room and saw a
broken-down harpsichord standing in a corner.

She jumped up gay as a bird and ran to open it. There were several
broken keys, and those that still were whole gave forth quaint,
plaintive little sounds but she sang:

             "Si tu m'aimais, tu serais roi de la terre!"

and he remained beside the window, with the cold breeze fanning his
cheek, his head resting in his hand, and his eye piercing the gloomy
corner of the room from whence came the heavenly song.

Indeed! was he not king of all the world?

Thus passed a delicious hour. Anon the coach--which originally should
have brought the bridal pair hither, had not milor carried off the
bride in such high-handed fashion--came lumbering up to the door.

Prudent maman had despatched it off in the wake of the impetuous rider.
It contained a bundle of clothes and change of linen for Rose Marie and
had my lord's effects, too, in the boot.

Rose Marie gave a little cry of delight when she realised maman's
forethought, and then one of dismay for she suddenly became conscious
of her disordered dress.

The worthy hostess--fat, greasy and motherly, had entered, candle in
hand, to announce the arrival of the coach.

"Me and my man expected Monsieur and Madame to arrive in it," she
explained volubly. "Monsieur's servant came yesterday to bespeak
the rooms and to arrange for the stabling. I was so surprised when
Monsieur arrived on horseback, so much earlier, too, than we had
anticipated--else I had had supper ready ere this, for Monsieur and
Madame must surely be hungry."

"But supper must be ready by now, good Madame Blond," said Rose Marie
blushing to hear herself called "Madame," "and I pray you have my
effects taken to my room."

"They are there already, so please you, my pigeon," said the amiable
old soul, "and there is some water for washing your pretty face."

"And will supper be ready soon?" she reiterated insistently for she was
young and healthy, and had eaten very little for sheer excitement all
day.

"While you smooth out your golden curls, _ma mignonne_, I'll dish
up the soup. Nay! but Monsieur is in luck's way!" she said, shaking
her large round head. "Madame is the comeliest bride we have seen
at St. Denis for a long time past. And they all come this way, you
know--away from the prying eyes of kindly friends. Me and my man are so
discreet!--especially if the bride be so pretty and the bridegroom so
good to look at."

She would have babbled on a long time, despite Monsieur's look of
fretful impatience, but fortunately just then the hissing sound of an
overflowing soup-pot came ominously through the open door.

"Holy Joseph, patron of good housewives, defend us!" exclaimed Mme.
Blond, making a dash for the door, "the croûte-au-pot is boiling over."

Rose Marie made to follow her.

"Need you go, my snowdrop?" he asked, loth to let her go.

"Just to change my crumpled gown, and smooth my hair," she replied
demurely.

"You are so beautiful like this, I would not wish to see one single
curl altered upon your head, or one fold changed upon your gown."

She was standing against the table, the fingers of one hand resting
lightly upon the blackened oak, her head bent slightly forward the
while her blue eyes half sought, half shrank from his gaze.

He went up to her, and drew her to him. The desire was irresistible and
she almost called for that first kiss by her beauty, her innocence, her
perfect girlishness which was so ready to give all bliss and to taste
all happiness.

He kissed her fair hair, her eyes, her delicate cheeks now suffused
with blushes. Then with a look he asked for her lips and she understood
and yielded them to him with a glad little sigh of infinite trust.

The hand of time marked these heavenly minutes; surely the angels
looked down from their paradise in envy at this earthly heaven. Outside
the wind sighed amid the branches of the acacias, wafting into the room
something of the pungent odour of this spring air, of the opening buds
of poplars and of beeches and the languorous odour of newly-awakened
life.

Gently she tried to disengage herself from his arms.

"I must go now," she whispered.

"Not yet."

"For a moment and I'll come back."

"Not yet."

"Let go, dear lord, for I would go."

"Not till I've had another kiss."

Happiness and the springtime of the earth, joy and life and love
dancing hand in hand with youth! O Time, why dost not stop at moments
such as this?

The sighing of the reeds on the river bank came as the sound of a
fairy lullaby, the scent of the spring reached the girl's nostrils
like an intoxicant vapour, which clouded her brain. The room was quite
dark, and she could scarcely see his face, yet she felt that his eyes
perpetually asked a question, to which she could only respond by
closing her own:

"Tu m'aimes?" he whispered, and the heavy lids falling over ardent eyes
made mute response to him.

A confused sound of horses' hoofs outside, of shouts and calls
from within roused them both from their dream. She succeeded now in
disengaging herself from his arms, and still whispering:

"I'll come back!" she retreated toward the door.

Just as she reached it, the moon so long obscured burst forth in full
glory from behind a bank of clouds, her rays came straight into the
narrow room and lighted on the dainty figure of the girl standing with
crumpled white dress and hair disarranged, cheeks rosy red and eyes
full of promise and love against the dark background of the heavy oaken
door.

Michael looked upon her with longing, hungry eyes, drinking in every
line of that delicately-moulded form, the graceful neck, the slender
hands, the firm girlish shoulders on which the prim kerchief had become
slightly disarranged. Then as she retreated further into the next room,
she vanished from his sight; the door fell to behind her with a heavy,
ominous sound, shutting out the radiant vision of Michael's cherished
dream, leaving him on the other side of the heavenly portals, alone and
desolate.

Thus he saw her in full light, and lost her in the shadows. Something
of the premonition of what was to come already held his heart as in
a cold and cruel vice. When the door closed upon his dream, upon his
Rose Marie, he knew by an unerring and torturing instinct that he would
never, never see her quite as she had been just now. The Rose Marie who
had left him was for remembrance.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                         Though doom keep always heaven and hell
              Irreconcilable, infinitely apart;
              Keep not in twain for ever heart and heart
              That once, albeit by not thy law, were one.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


The next moment the door which gave on the landing was thrown open, and
Michael stood face to face with M. Legros.

Thus premonition had come true. Thus would nothing remain of the past
delicious hour only remembrance and bitter, bitter longing for what
could never be.

The light of the one candle fell full upon the unromantic figure of
the good tailor, on his pallid face whereon beads of perspiration told
their mute tale of anxiety and of fulsome wrath. His eyes, dilated and
tawny in colour were fastened full upon the reprobate, demanding above
all things to know if the outraged father had perchance arrived too
late.

The man's gay wedding clothes were torn and awry; mud covered his shoes
and stockings for he had not even stopped to be booted and spurred. The
old English serving-man who had vainly tried earlier in the day to gain
speech with the master tailor, had reached the august presence at last,
and had handed to M. Legros the letter which was to be given to him and
to no one else. It was written in a bold, clear hand and in scholarly
French for the better understanding of Monsieur the tailor to the king.
Mistress Peyton having penned a few ill-scrawled, ill-spelt words had
bethought herself of a young Huguenot clerk of French parentage who
earned his living in London by the work of his pen; and being desirous
above all that M. Legros should fully comprehend her letter, she caused
it to be translated and writ clearly by that same young clerk, ere she
finally entrusted it to Daniel Pye for delivery.

Thus it was that that which was written in the letter did not fail to
reach the understanding of good Papa Legros. It was a full and detailed
account of the treachery which had been perpetrated on the tailor's
daughter by one Michael Kestyon, who was naught but a dissolute
profligate, a liar and a cheat, since his own cousin was Earl of
Stowmaries, and no one else had any right to such title but he.

Papa Legros did not trouble to ask many questions, and since the
English lout knew not a word of French, the good tailor took no further
heed of him. He spoke to no one, not even to his wife. The letter said
something which must be verified at once--at once--before it was too
late. He gave orders that no one--least of all Mme. Legros--was to be
disturbed, the merrimaking was to go on, the dancing, the eating and
drinking, the speech making and all.

Then he slipped out by the back door and reached the small outbuilding
where he kept a horse, which served him on occasions when he had to go
to Versailles to try on a pair of breeches for His Majesty the King.
It took good M. Legros no time to saddle his horse, and a ride of over
three hours had no terrors for him beside the awful fear which gripped
his paternal heart.

Before he left his home he detached from a nail on the wall of the shed
an enormous stick with heavy leather thong, with which he at times
administered castigation to refractory or evil-minded 'prentices.

Then he mounted his horse and rode away in the fast-gathering twilight.

He knew his way to St. Denis and to the inn whither he wished to go. He
put his horse to a gentle canter and it was just past nine o'clock when
he saw the light in the old tower of the Church of St. Denis.

He was tired and stiff from riding, but he had sufficient control of
himself to speak quietly to the host of the little inn, and to ask
cheerfully of good Mme. Blond which room his daughter was occupying.

The amiable old soul pointed the way up the stairs, then returned to
her stock-pot with the cheerful comment that she would serve the soup
in a few moments.

Then Papa Legros went upstairs and pushing open the door stood face
to face with Michael. With one hand he gripped the heavy stick with
the stout leather thong on it, with the other he fumbled in the pocket
of his surcoat until he found the letter again--the letter which was
penned in such scholarly French by the Huguenot clerk, and which
revealed such damnable treachery.

But Papa Legros wanted above all to be fair. During the long,
monotonous ride in the silence and darkness of this spring evening he
had had time to collect his thoughts somewhat, to weigh the value of
the anonymous writing, to think of milor as he had known him these
past three weeks: gallant and plucky to a fault, proud, generous and
brave; and now that he stood before the man, saw the noble bearing of
the head, the fine dark eyes, the mouth that was so ready to smile or
to speak gentle words, his terror fled from him, and though his voice
still shook a little from the intensity of his emotion, he contrived to
say quite quietly, as he held the crumpled letter out toward Michael:

"My lord--you will forgive me--I know you will understand--but it is
the child's happiness--and--and--my lord, will you read this letter and
tell me if its contents are true?"

Michael took the paper from him quite mechanically, for of course he
had guessed its contents, but mayhap he had a vague desire to know who
it was that had so wantonly destroyed his happiness. He went to the
table and drew the flickering candle a little nearer, then bent his
tall figure to read that cruel letter.

The handwriting told him nothing, but the tale was plainly told. The
avenging angel of God was already standing with flaming sword at the
gate of his paradise, forbidding him ever to enter. He looked up from
the letter to that black door behind which she was; it almost seemed as
if his aching eyes could pierce the solid oak. She was there behind the
door and he could never, never again go to her, he could never, never
again hold her in his arms.

Heaven had vanished and at his feet now yawned merciless, illimitable
Hell.

"My lord," and the trembling voice of the outraged father broke in upon
his thoughts, "my lord, I still await your answer--I'll not believe
that nameless scrawl--I ask your word--only your solemn word, my lord,
and all my fears will vanish. Swear to me, my lord, on the innocent
head of my darling child that this letter holds nothing but calumnies
and I'll believe you, my lord--if you'll swear it on her golden head."

Do you know that hush that to the imagination seems to fall upon the
whole world just when a human heart is about to break? Michael felt
that hush all around him now; the April wind ceased its moaning in the
boughs of the young acacia trees, the reeds by the river bank sighed
no longer in the breeze, awakened nature just for one moment fell
back into winter-like sleep, and a shadow--blacker and more dense than
any that can fall from an angry heaven over the earth--descended on
Michael's soul.

To swear--as he had sworn this morning at the foot of the altar? To
swear by that most sacred thing upon God's earth, her sweet head?--no!

"Will you swear, my lord, that this letter is but vile calumny?"

And Michael gave answer loudly and firmly:

"It is the truth!"

Less like a man than like an infuriated beast, the meek man--now an
outraged father--literally sprang forward with upraised arm wielding
the heavy dog-whip, ready to strike the miscreant in the face.

The proud, defiant head, noble even now in its humiliation, was bent
without a murmur. Michael made no movement to avert the blow.

"Will you not kill me instead?" was all the protest which he made.

Legros' upraised hand fell nerveless by his side. He threw the stick
away from him. He, poor soul, had never learned to control emotion,
he had gone through no hard school wherein tears are jeered at, and
sorrows unshared. He had never learned to be ashamed either of joy or
of grief, and now, face to face with this man who had so deeply wronged
him, and whom, despite his wrath, he was powerless to strike, he sank
into a chair, and buried his face in his hands whilst a pitiful moan
escaped his lips.

"The child--the poor child--how shall I ever tell her? The shame of it
all--the cruelty--the shame--how shall I tell her?"

And Time's callous hand marked these minutes of terrible soul-agony,
just as awhile ago it had marked the fleeting moments of
celestial joy. Michael was silent, the while he wondered almost
senselessly--stupidly--if Hell could hold more awful agony than he was
enduring now.

Yet through it all his turbulent soul rebelled at the situation,
the sentimental parleyings, the pitiful grief of the father and the
enforced humility of his own attitude. He knew that he had lost his
Rose Marie, that the parents would never give her to him now; the solid
and indestructible wall of bourgeois integrity stood between him and
those mad, glad dreams of triumph and of happiness.

It was characteristic of the man that he never for a moment attempted
to guess or to find out the channel through which his own misery had
come to him. He certainly never suspected his cousin of treachery.
Fate had dealt the blow cruelly and remorselessly and sent him back
to a worse hell than he had ever known; a hell which Satan reserves
for those he hates the most--the way to it leads past the entrance to
heaven.

"Good M. Legros," said Michael at last, striving to curb his impatience
and to speak with gentleness, "will you try and listen to me? Nay,
you need not fear, 'tis not my purpose to plead justification, nor
yet leniency--I wish that you could bring yourself to believe that
though I wooed and won your daughter by what you think is naught but
an abominable trick, I had one great thought above all others and that
was that I would make her happy. This I do swear by the living God, and
by what I hold dearer still, by the love which I bear to Rose Marie.
And as there is a heaven above me, I would have made her happy, for I
had gained her heart, and anon when the bonds of mine own boundless
love had rivetted her still more closely to me, I should have taught
her to forgive my venial sin of having entered heaven by a tortuous
way. The name which I bear is mine own, the title which I have assumed
is mine by right, I would have conquered it for myself and for her.
You say that it is not to be--yet I swear to you that she will not be
happy if you take her from me. This I know; if I did not I would go to
her myself and tell her that I have lied to her. If despite what you
know you will still confide her to me, you will never regret it to your
dying day, for apart from the life of love and happiness which will be
hers, I will lavish upon her all the treasures of satisfied ambition,
far surpassing anything which you--her father--have ever wished for
her."

M. Legros despite his grief which had completely overmastered him for
awhile, raised his head in absolute astonishment. Surely these English
were the most astounding people in all the world! Here was this man
who of a truth had committed the most flagrant, most impudent act
of trickery, that had ever been perpetrated within memory of living
man--he had done this thing and been ignominiously found out. By all
the laws of decent and seemly behaviour he should now be standing
humble and ashamed before the man whom he had tried to injure. And yet
what happened? Here he stood, in perfect calm and undisguised pride,
not a muscle of his face twitched with emotion, and his neck was as
stiff as if he were exulting in some noble deed.

Had these English no sense of what was fitting? had they no heart? no
feelings? no blood within their veins? The man--so help us the living
God!--was actually suggesting that his trickery be condoned, that an
innocent child be entrusted to him, who stood convicted of falsehood
and of treachery! Good M. Legros' Gallic blood boiled within him,
overwhelming grief gave place to uncontrollable wrath. He rose to his
feet, and pulled up his small stature to its uttermost height.

"You will make her happy!" he thundered, throwing an infinity of
withering scorn into every word. "You--who like a prying jackal came to
steal the fledgling from its nest? You who took money with one hand,
the while you snatched a girl's honour with the other? With lying lips
and soft, false words you stole our child's heart--even until father
and mother were forgotten for the sake of the liar and the cheat who--"

Michael held up a quick warning hand, and instinctively the insults
died on the other man's lips. Rose Marie--white as the clinging,
crumpled gown which she had hastily refastened when anon she heard her
father's voice raised in angered scorn--Rose Marie silent and still,
and with great eyes fixed on Michael Kestyon, was standing in the
doorway.

At sight of her good M. Legros' grief swept over him with renewed
force. Once more he sank into a chair, and buried his face in his hands
whilst a moan of painful soul-agony escaped his lips.

"The child!--the child! My God how to tell her!"

But Rose Marie's voice came quite clear and distinct, there was no
catch in her throat, nor tremor in the gentle tones as she said quietly:

"Nay! my dear father, an there is aught to tell--milor will best know
how to say it to me."




                             CHAPTER XXVI

             As the dawn loves the sunlight, I love thee.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


Papa Legros at first had been too dazed to protest. Truly his loving
heart had been for hours on the rack at thought of the awful task which
lay before him--the opening of his child's eyes to the monstrous trick
played upon her by the man to whom her innocent heart had turned in
perfect love and in perfect trust. He, the father, who worshipped this
dainty, delicately-nurtured daughter, who had spent the past twenty
years of an arduous life in trying to smooth away every unevenness
from the child's pathway of life, now suddenly saw himself like unto
the scarlet-clad executioner, rope and branding irons in hand, forced
to bind his beloved one on the rack, and himself to apply the searing
torture of sorrow and of shame to her soul.

The child's calm words as she stood confronting the miscreant had
almost brought relief. Why indeed should not the villain accomplish
his own unmasking? Papa Legros hating the man who had done him and his
child an infinite wrong, had a sufficiency of perception in him to
realise, with that subtle cruelty of which the meek are alone capable,
that he could not inflict more exquisite torture on his enemy than by
forcing him to stand self-convicted before the child.

Just for the moment--and truly he may be forgiven for it--all that was
good and kind in the gentle nature of the tailor had been ousted by his
wrath as a father and as a man. He had found himself unable to strike
the liar just now; but he longed for the power to torture his very
soul, to bring him to the dust in sorrow and humiliation, to see the
proud head down in the mud of abject shame. Great God! did you not know
that Papa Legros had learned to love this man like he would his own
son, and that the grief which he felt was in part for Rose Marie and in
part for the miscreant who had twined himself around his heartstrings,
and whom he cherished the while he longed to chastise him with infinite
cruelty?

"Father dear," said Rose Marie after a slight pause, "will you not
allow me to speak with milor alone?"

"I would not trust thee one second in his keeping, child, now I know
him for what he is."

"You need have no fear, dear," she rejoined calmly, "and 'twere best
methinks for us all if milor were to tell me himself all that I ought
to know."

The candle flickered low, and Michael stood back amidst the shadow;
thus the good tailor failed to see if his own shaft had gone home--if
it had pierced that armour of stolid English indifference which the
descendant of Gallic forebears found so difficult to comprehend.

Certain it is that Michael raised no protest, and that not even a sigh
escaped him as this final insult was hurled at him with the utmost
refinement of vengeful cruelty.

Rose Marie went up to her father and placed her small cool hands on
his. Then with gentle persuasion she drew him up. He yielded to her,
for vaguely at the bottom of his heart, he knew that he could trust the
man whom he loved and hated, yet even now could not wholly despise.
For one moment as father and daughter stood side by side, he took
her in his arms and kissed her forehead. She rested against him cold
and placid, and when he released her from his embrace she took his
rough toil-worn hand and kissed it tenderly. Then with supreme yet
irresistible gentleness she led him out of the room.

As he passed close to Michael he held out the fateful letter to him.

"You will show her that," he almost commanded.

"An you wish it," replied the other, as he took the letter from him.

A curious instinct prompted Michael to blow out the flickering light,
just as Rose Marie, having closed the door behind her father, turned
back into the room. He went up to her, but she retreated a step or two
at his approach, and of her own accord went to the window seat, there
where a brief hour ago she had sat with him in perfect communion and
perfect happiness.

The casement was still open, and the moon which had been so fitful
throughout the evening poured her cold radiance straight on the dainty
silhouette of the girl, just as she had done awhile ago, ere the gates
of paradise were closed and the angels had ceased to sing their glad
hosannas! Outside, the sighing of the reeds and the moaning of the wind
in the young acacias made a sound as of innumerable feet of restless
spirits stirring the dead leaves of an unforgettable past.

"That letter, milor," said Rose Marie, "will you give it me--since my
father hath so commanded."

Without a word he handed the paper to her, and when he saw that she
could not read it--for the room was dark and the rays of the moon not
sufficiently bright--he took out his tinder-box and relighted the
guttering candle. Then as the wind blew the feeble flame hither and
thither he shielded it with his hand, and held the candle so that she
might read and yet not move from that window seat.

She read the letter through to the end, and while she read he could see
the top of her head bent down to the paper, and the wealth of those
fair curls which he would never again be allowed to kiss.

When she had finished reading, she looked up and he threw the candle
far away out through the window.

"Then you had lied to me," was all that she said; and she said it so
calmly, so quietly, like the true snow maiden which she had once more
become, now that he who alone had the power to turn the snow to living
fire, was proved to be treacherous and false. Then she folded up the
letter and slipped it under her kerchief.

Stately and tall as the water lilies on the pond which he had once
described to her--she drew up her slender figure and held her little
head erect. She did not look in his direction but rose slowly and
turned to go out of the room.

"Rose Marie," he called out to her in an involuntary moan of agony.

Instinctively his hand went out to her as she passed, and clutched the
crumpled wedding dress which seemed to wrap her in, now like a shroud.
She tried to disengage her gown, but as he held it tight she desisted,
standing there cold and impassive, a woman turned to ice.

"Rose Marie!" he whispered, "my own little snowdrop, will you be
so unyielding now? Awhile ago do you remember, you yielded to the
sweetness of a first kiss?"

"And yet you lied to me," she said slowly, tonelessly, the while her
eyes sought the distant horizon far away, where astride on the cold
grey mists unreached by the tender light of the moon, her dreams of
happiness were fleeting quickly away.

He drew himself up and caught her to him with a masterful gesture
of possession. He felt her body rigid and impassive at his touch,
stiffening in a backward motion away from him behind that massive stone
wall of awful finality which had so mercilessly risen between her and
him. He felt that he was losing her, that she was slipping away from
him--slipping--up, up to some cold and unresponsive heaven, peopled
with stern angels, whose great white wings would soon enclose her and
hide her from him forever. He felt that he was losing her, not with
that same bitter-sweet sense of sadness as he did just now when the
savour of her exquisite lips still clung to his own, and she retreated
out of his sight like a perfect vision of beauty.

Now an almost savage longing was in him not to let her go, to keep her
to him at any cost, any sacrifice, even that of his own self-control.
There was enough power in his own ardent love for her so to bind her to
him that she could never, never leave him.

"My beautiful crimson rose," he murmured, drawing her closer, closer,
even while he felt that with her whole gentle strength she opposed an
icy calm to the warm glow of his passion, "turn your dear eyes to me,
just for one brief moment. Oh! think, think of the past few days when
first our hearts, our souls, our entire beings met in perfect accord.
Look at me, my dear, sweet soul, am I not the man to whom you have
listened so oft, sitting at your harpsichord, the while he whispered
to you the first words of love? Look, look, my dear, mine eyes, are
they not the same?--my lips have they not met yours in one sublime,
unforgettable kiss? You were a child, ere your soul met mine--now you
are a woman, 'tis I who applied the magic fire to your heart, 'tis I
who kindled the flame of your pure love; you are no longer a child now,
Rose Marie, you are an exquisitely beautiful woman, and I love you with
every fibre of my body, with every aspiration of my soul--"

"And yet you lied to me."

"And would lie again, would sin again a thousand times, since my sin
gave you to me. Sweetheart, if I have sinned, yet have I expiated
already--one cold look from your dear eyes hath caused me more acute
agony than the damned can ever suffer in Hell. My love--my love--do
you understand what you mean to me? Have you realised the exquisite
gift--your perfect womanhood--which you would snatch from me? I was a
wastrel, a thief, a miserable degraded wretch--awhile ago when I held
you in my arms I was king of all the world. By my sin I won you! Great
God, then is not my sin the greatest, grandest and most glorious deed
ever accomplished by man--in order to gain a heaven?"

But with all his ardour, all his savage strength of will and of
purpose, Michael was but bruising his heart against a solid stone
wall. Perhaps if Rose Marie had been a little older, a little more
sophisticated, a little more wearied in the ways of men, she might have
yielded to the love of the man, and closed her eyes to the deeds of the
sinner. Whatever else he had done, she would easily have forgiven--nay!
she would never have judged--but it was the betrayal of her trust which
turned her heart to stone. Of course she had not had time as yet to
think. In the letter which he had given her she had read the awful
account of that transaction wherein she appeared as a mere chattel
tossed from one hand to another, paid for with money like a bale of
goods.

Oh! the shame of it! And he, to whom she had given her entire heart and
soul, to whom she was ready to yield herself absolutely and completely
had bought her at a price. Love? She no longer believed in it. If he
had lied to her, then neither love nor purity nor manhood existed on
God's earth--and this was no vale of tears but one of infinite shame.

She looked down on him with just such a cold look in her eyes as he had
compared to the infliction of the tortures of the damned. She knew that
physically she would be too weak to resist him, and she would scorn to
call out to her father. This she tried to convey to him by that cold
look and by the perfect placidity of her demeanour.

For one moment he was conscious of the wild desire to snatch his
happiness from out the burning brand even now, and to take her in his
arms and ride away with her into the land of forgetfulness. The wind
in the trees seemed to call out to him not to let her go, and the
reeds murmured as they bent their heavy heads that she would forgive
everything after another kiss.

"Rose Marie!"

Something of what was passing in his mind must have reached her inner
consciousness. She was quite woman enough to know that here was no
ephemeral passion, no flame of desire extinguished as soon as born.
He loved her and she loved him, that was as true, as incontestable as
that--in her understanding--the treacherous act which he had committed
now stood irremediably between them, whilst to his wild and rugged
sense of the overwhelming grandeur of love, nothing could or should
ever part him from her.

In her eyes the betrayal was greater than the love which--in his--had
by its very existence atoned for everything. But throughout her deeply
resentful feeling of wrong done to her and hers there was mayhap an
unconscious sense of weakness, a desire to bring forth a greater array
of will power and set it up against the insinuating persuasion of his
voice, the insidious magic of his touch. Certain it is that she felt
suddenly compelled to break the rigid silence which throughout his
impassioned pleading she had so deliberately imposed upon herself.

Held in his nervy grip, she could not altogether withdraw from him, but
her eyes, cold and calm sought his in the gloom.

"My lord," she said quietly and firmly, "since I know you by no other
name, therefore still my lord to me, I would have you recall the day
when sitting in my father's house, you whiled away an idle afternoon
by telling a foolish maid the pretty allegory of water lilies growing
on the weedy pond at Cluny, and of the slime which oozes from unclean
things and pollutes the white petals of the flowers. 'Twas a pretty
tale and no doubt it afforded you much amusement to see the look of
puzzledom in the eyes of an ignorant tailor's wench. Well, my lord!
the wench is no longer ignorant now--she understands the rude imagery,
her eyes have seen such pollution, such miserable corruption as will
forever leave them tainted with the villainy which they have seen.
Whoever you are, sir, I know not--what other deeds of evil and disgrace
you may have committed I care not--I only pray God that we may never
meet again. You no doubt will find pleasures elsewhere, some other
flower to pollute with your touch, some other heart to break. That you
brought shame upon me, mayhap God will one day forgive you, I could
perchance have forgiven you that had your sin rested there, but you
tried to bring dishonour on my father's house. You did succeed in
bringing sorrow and shame into it. My father and mother, who loved you
almost as a son, will never again hold their heads high among their
kind; a dishonoured daughter--for I am that now, for my true husband
will cast me off as a woman unfit to be his mate--a dishonoured
daughter is a lasting curse upon a house. That is your work, stranger,
whoever you are; and this deed like unto the treachery which by a kiss
brought the beloved Master to death upon the Cross, cries out to heaven
for punishment; it is writ on the very front page in the book of the
recording angel, and all the tears which you may shed, all the blood
and all the atonement could not now wipe that front page clean. All
this I do know, and yet one thing more: and that is that you do err
when you speak of my love for you. To you who have lied, who with soft
words and false pretences did enter my father's house and stole that
which is most precious to us humble folk, our honour and the integrity
of our name, to such as that, I gave no love. 'Tis true that I did love
a man once--for one brief hour he lived in my heart but nowhere else.
He was true and loyal, too proud to lie, too noble to steal. He has
vanished like the mist, leaving no trace of his passage, for my heart
wherein he dwelt is broken, and even his memory hath faded from my
ken--"

Her voice died away like a long-drawn-out sigh, mingling with the
murmur of the reeds and the moaning as of lost souls gliding through
the branches of the acacias in their restless wandering through
infinite space.

The next moment she was gone, leaving in Michael's trembling hands a
scrap of torn lace, a tiny shred of her gown.

All that was left of her--and the savour of a bitter memory--rosemary
for remembrance!




                             CHAPTER XXVII

         Such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour
         That ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.
                                          --A WINTER'S TALE V. 2.


It was about an hour later that a hired coach brought three English
gentlemen to the small inn at St. Denis.

M. Blond was much perturbed. He was not accustomed to foreigners at any
time and he held the English theoretically in abhorrence, and now here
were four of these milors actually under his roof at one and the same
time.

The three who had last arrived in the coach from Paris carried matters
off in a very high-handed fashion and seemed ready to throw money about
in a manner which was highly satisfactory to the bedraggled and seedy
married couple who--besides the landlord and his spouse--formed the sum
total of the personnel at the Sign of "Three Archangels" in St. Denis.

Sir John Ayloffe had assumed the leadership of the small party. He gave
his own name to the landlord, and added that he and his two friends had
come to pay their respects to my lord of Stowmaries, but lately arrived
with his young bride.

Now can you wonder at good M. Blond's perturbation? The incidents which
had crowded in at the Sign of the "Three Archangels" in the past half
hour were enough to furnish food for gossip for many a long evening
to come. In point of fact M. and Mme. Blond had just started talking
the whole sequence of events over from the beginning when the coach
arrived with the three English milors, nor had the worthy couple had
any chance of comparing impressions on these same mysterious events.

Firstly there had been the extraordinary arrival of the bride and
bridegroom, who of a truth had been expected, since relays for the
next day's journey had been sent to the "Three Archangels" the day
before, but they certainly had not been expected under such amazing
circumstances, the English milor's horse covered with lather, and
the bride in her wedding gown all crumpled and soiled, clinging to
her newly-wedded husband in front of his saddle, and in a vastly
uncomfortable position.

This astonishing arrival of a bride and bridegroom who were reputed to
be passing wealthy had of course vastly upset mine good host and his
amiable wife. But then English milors were known to be eccentric, in
fact most folk who had travelled in the fog-ridden country vowed that
all the people there were more or less mad. 'Twas but lately that they
had cut off the head of their king and set up a low-born soldier to
rule them. No wonder that King Louis--whom _le bon Dieu_ preserve!--was
greatly angered with these English, and only forgave them when they
returned to their senses and once more acknowledged the authority of
him who was their king by right divine.

Worthy Monsieur Blond had explained all these matters to his buxom wife
in an off-hand yet comprehensive manner, the while the latter made
haste to hurry on the preparations for supper, for the pretty bride and
the English milor--deeply in love with one another though they were, as
any one who looked could see--had shown a very sensible and laudable
desire to have some of Mme. Blond's excellent croûte-au-pot to warm the
cockles of their young hearts.

The second incident on this eventful evening was of minor importance,
and tended greatly to minimise the eccentricity of that romantic
arrival. The coach which should have brought the bridal pair to the
"Three Archangels" did come in due time--even whilst Mme. Blond was
preparing her bit of fricandeau garnished with fresh winter cabbage,
which was to be the second course at the bridal supper.

The thoughtful mother of the love-sick bride had had the good sense to
send her daughter's effects along, and all recollection of the curious
arrival on horseback was forgotten before the prosy advent of boxes and
bundles of clothes.

Mme. Blond, moreover, became fully satisfied that everything was right
as right could be, when she went upstairs to announce the arrival
of the coach. The bride's pretty face was as pink as the eglantine
in June, and her eyes brighter than the full moon outside, whilst
milor--ah, well, Mme. Blond had seen many a man in love in her day,
Blond himself had not been backward when he was courting her--but
never, never, had she seen a man so gloating on the sight of his young
wife, as that eccentric mad milor had done, the while the pretty dear
was prosily asking for supper.

All then had been for the best at nine of the clock that evening,
but mark ye, what happened after that. Less than ten minutes later a
rider--obviously half exhausted from a long and wearying journey--drew
rein outside the "Three Archangels." M. Blond who more than once
had been in Paris, had no difficulty in recognising in the belated
traveller Master Legros, tailor in chief to His Majesty the King, and
the father of the pretty bride upstairs.

Master Legros undoubtedly did not look like himself, though he did try
to assume a jaunty air as he asked to be shown the room wherein his
daughter and milor would presently be supping.

It seemed a fairly simple incident at the time, this late arrival here
of the bride's father, though Mme. Blond in thinking over the matter
afterwards distinctly remembered that the fact did strike her as odd.
What should good M. Legros be doing at St. Denis at this tardy hour,
when most good citizens should be in bed, and when he had given his
paternal blessing to the young couple fully four hours ago?

"Milor's best suit of clothes had not been finished in time for the
departure, and Maitre Legros brought it along himself," suggested M.
Blond placidly.

But he scratched his dark poll while he made this suggestion knowing it
to be nonsense.

Mme. Blond's premonitions proved to be correct. Half an hour elapsed,
the while she and Blond took turns on the upstairs landing to try and
hear something of what was going on inside that room, wherein awhile
ago the turtle doves had been cooing so prettily. The croûte-au-pot had
been ready ages ago but no one had asked for it. No sound penetrated
through the heavy oaken doors; only once had Mme. Blond heard a voice
raised in what seemed most terrible anger. She then fled incontinently
back to her kitchen.

A quarter of an hour later M. Legros gave orders that the coach which
had brought his daughter's effects an hour previously, be got ready
at once, and that those horses be put to it that had been sent down
the day before with a view to the continuance of the journey to Havre.
He gave no explanation, of course, nor answered any of the discreet
questions put to him by Mme. Blond. He tried to swallow some hot soup,
but gave up the attempt after the third spoonful; he looked as white as
a sheet, and trembled like a poplar leaf in the breeze. Presently the
young bride came down the stairs. She still wore her wedding gown under
her thick dark cloak. Mme. Blond noticed how crumpled it looked and
that a great piece of the beautiful lace was torn off.

But she wore her hood closely wrapped round her head, so neither
Monsieur nor Madame could see anything of her face; nor did she speak
any words, save a short "Thank you!" to Mme. Blond, and this she said
in a curious, husky voice as if her throat were choked.

Maitre Legros paid lavishly for everything. The bride's boxes and
bundles were once more stowed away in the boot of the coach; then she
and her father stepped into the vehicle, the postillion cracked his
whip, there was a scraping of iron hoofs on the rough paving stones, a
clanking of chains, a shout or two and the lumbering coach turned out
toward the highroad and was quickly lost to sight in the gloom.

After that nothing!

Not a sound came from the room where the English milor had remained
alone. Mme. Blond at her wits' ends what to do or how to interpret the
remarkable series of incidents which had occurred beneath her roof, had
thought of knocking at milor's door and asking him if he would have
some supper.

Her mind--which as her good man was wont to say--was ever inclined to
romance, had seen horrible visions of a bleeding corpse lying prone
upon the parlour floor. Suicide must have followed this forcible
abduction by an infuriated father, of the ardently worshipped bride.

Great was her astonishment, perhaps also her disappointment, when
in answer to a peremptory "Come in" she went into the room and saw
milor standing there by the open window looking out upon the moonlit
landscape for all the world as if nothing had happened.

"There he was," she explained somewhat irately to her man, for she felt
almost as if she had been cheated out of the most thrilling chapter of
her romance, "dressed in his beautiful bridal clothes, with arms folded
across his chest, and not a hair on his head the least bit ruffled. Ah!
these English! they have no heart. I thought to find him either with a
sword thrust through his heart, else a man mad and raving with grief.
Holy Virgin! Had my father taken me away from thee, my Blond, on the
very night of our wedding day, wouldst thou not have been crazy with
rage, even if thou hadst not actually committed suicide? There's heart
for thee! There's love! But not in these English! And wilt believe me
that when I said something to milor about supper, he did not even curse
me, but said quite quietly that he had no hunger."

Well now! does not all that give furiously to think?

Milor had no hunger, the bride had gone and the supper was ready. What
could Mme. Blond do better than to dish up the croûte-au-pot and the
fricandeau with the winter cabbage and to serve it to her man?

Monsieur Blond took off his heavy boots and donned a pair of cloth
slippers, he covered his dark hair with a warmly-fitting cap and drew
the most comfortable chair to the table, preparatory to enjoying a
supper fit for an English milor.

But he was not destined to enjoy more than a preliminary sniff at the
succulent croûte-au-pot. Mme. Blond had been very talkative and the
dishing-up process consequently slow, and at the very moment when good
M. Blond was conveying the first spoonful of soup to his mouth there
was a loud noise of wheels grating against the slipper, the cracking
of a whip and a good deal of shouting; all of which were unmistakable
signs that more mysterious travellers had chosen this eventful night
for their arrival at the "Three Archangels."




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

             What whisperest thou? Nay, why
             Name the dead hours? I mind them well:
             Their ghosts in many darkened doorways dwell
             With desolate eyes to know them by.
                                        --DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.


Michael Kestyon had paid no heed to the noise of this last arrival.
Indeed he had heard nothing since that one awful noise, the departure
of the coach which bore her away from him. How long ago that was he
could not say. It might have been a moment or a cycle of years. Just
before it he had had his last glimpse of her. She crossed the room in
company with her father, who had come up to fetch her. She was wrapped
from head to foot in cloak and hood; all that he could see of her was
her torn wedding gown.

He made no movement as she walked past him, and though his whole soul
called out her name, his lips uttered no sound. What were the use? If
she did not hear the silent call of love, no words could move her.

"Even his memory hath faded from my ken."

Michael vaguely remembering the sacred tale told him in his childhood
by his mother of how God had hurled His sinful angels from Heaven down
to Hell, could not recall that in His anger He had used words that were
quite so cruel.

Well, that page in life had been written, the book was closed. One
brief glimpse at possible happiness, one tiny chink open in the gates
of paradise, and then once more the weary tramp along the road which
leads to misery on this earth, to perdition hereafter.

The gambler had staked his all upon one venture and had lost. But
Michael Kestyon was not made of the mould which rots in a suicide's
grave or harbours a brain which goes crazy with grief.

A weaker man would have felt regrets, a better man would have been
racked with remorse. Michael with her words ringing in his ears thought
only of redemption.

"My father and mother, who loved you as their son, will never again
hold their heads high among their kind--for a dishonoured daughter is
a lasting curse upon a house. That is your work, stranger--it is writ
on the front page in the book of the recording angel, and all the tears
which you may shed, all the blood and all the atonement could not now
wipe that front page clean."

The gambler in losing all had, it seems, involved others in his ruin;
innocent people who had loved and trusted him. The debt which he had
thus contracted would have to be paid to them, not in the coin which
Michael had tendered--since it had been dross in their sight--but in
coin which would compensate them for all that they had lost.

And it was because of the future redemption of that great debt, because
of all that there was yet to do, that Michael held such a tight rein
over his reason, the while it almost tottered beneath the crushing
blow. Nor did he allow the thought of suicide to dwell in his mind. Yet
madness and death--the twin phantoms born of cowardice--lurked within
the dark shadows of the low-raftered room, after Rose Marie's last
passage along the uneven floor when her torn wedding gown swept over
the boards with a sighing and swishing sound, which would reverberate
in Michael's heart throughout eternity.

From beneath the lintel of that oaken door which had clanged to behind
her, the spectre of madness grinned into the deserted room, and
beckoned to the man who stood there in utter loneliness; and on the
window-sill whereat she had sat awhile ago the gaunt shadow of suicide
whispered the alluring words: Rest! Forgetfulness! Rest! Forgetfulness!

Michael did not flee from the twin demons. He called them to his side
and looked fully and squarely at their hideous, alluring forms.

Madness and Death! Destruction of the mind or of the body. Both would
blot her image from his soul. Madness enticed by drink would mean the
bestial forgetfulness of heavy sleep and addled intellect. Death would
mean infinite peace.

The struggle 'twixt devils and the man was fierce and short. Anon the
crouching spectres vanished into the night; and the man stood there
in splendid isolation with the memory of a great crime and of a brief
joy for sole companion of his loneliness. But the man was a man for
all that; body and mind were still the slaves of his will, not for the
carving of his own fortune now, not for the spinning of the web of
Fate, but bound and fettered under the heel of an iron determination to
wipe out the writing on that front page in the book of the recording
angel; not by tears, not by blood and cringing atonement, but by deeds
and acts dark if necessary, heroic always, by vanquishing the wrongs of
the past with the triumphant redemption to come.

In this mood the good landlady of the "Three Archangels" found him and
marvelled at British indifference in the face of a love tragedy. And he
was still in this selfsame mood half an hour or so later when my lord
of Stowmaries and his friends came upon the solitary watcher in the
night.

Michael had not eaten, nor had he relinquished his place by the open
window, for it seemed to his over-sensitive mind as if the sound of
those wheels which bore his snowdrop further and further away from him
echoed against the distant bank of storm-portending clouds, and though
the heartrending sound reverberated within him like unto the grinding
of the rack which tears the limbs and martyrizes the body, yet it still
seemed something of her, the last memory, the final farewell.

It was past ten o'clock now, and of a surety Michael thought that he
must have fallen asleep, dreaming by that open window, when the sudden
noise of several familiar voices, a loud if somewhat forced laugh, and
the peremptory throwing open of the door brought the dreamer back to
the exigencies of the moment.

The aspect of the room was almost weird, dark and gloomy with only the
slanting moonbeams to touch with pale and capricious light the tall,
solitary figure in the window embrasure.

For a moment the three men paused beneath the lintel, their volatile
imagination strangely gripped by the picture before them, that dark
silhouette against the moonlit landscape beyond, the total air of
desolation and loneliness which seemed to hang like a pall even in the
gloom.

Sir John Ayloffe was the first to shake himself free from this unwonted
feeling of superstitious awe:

"Friend Michael, by the Mass!" he shouted with somewhat forced
jocoseness. "Still astir, and like the love-sick poet contemplating the
moon."

The loud words broke the spell of subtle and weird magic which seemed
to pervade the place. Michael Kestyon gave a start and turned abruptly
away from the window.

"Are we welcome, Michael?" added Lord Rochester pleasantly. "Or do we
intrude?"

Michael whose surprise at seeing the three men had been quite
momentary, now came forward with outstretched hands.

"Not in the least," he said cordially, "and ye are right welcome. I had
thoughts of going to bed and yet was longing for merry company, little
guessing that it would thus unexpectedly fall from heaven. And may I
ask what procures St. Denis the honour of this tardy visit from so
distinguished a company?"

"The desire to see you, Cousin," here interposed Lord Stowmaries, "and
if you'll allow us, to sup with you, for we were not invited to your
wedding feast, remember, and have not enjoyed the worthy tailor's good
cheer."

"We have not tasted food since the middle of the day," added Ayloffe,
"and that was none of the best."

"But mayhap Michael hath supped," suggested Lord Rochester, who
contrary to his usual freedom of manner and speech seemed unaccountably
reticent for the nonce.

"Nay, nay! And if I had I could sup again in such elegant company,"
rejoined Michael. "But I was dreaming indeed since I was forgetting
that we were still in the dark. Our amiable host must bring us light as
well as food. It will give me much pleasure to see your amiable faces
more clearly."

Even as he spoke he went to the door, and soon his calls to Mme. Blond
for lights and supper echoed pleasantly through the house.

The three others were left staring at one another in blank surprise.
They had not thought of putting questions to mine host on their
arrival, but had merely and somewhat peremptorily ordered M. Blond to
show them up to the room occupied by their friend, the English milor.
They, therefore, knew nothing of what had happened, but all three of
them vaguely felt--by a curious, unexplainable instinct--that something
was amiss, and knew that Michael's attitude of serene indifference was
only an assumed rôle.

"Strike me dead but there's something almost uncanny about the man,"
said Lord Rochester, forcing a laugh.

"Something has happened of course," rejoined Ayloffe, "but nothing to
concern us. Mayhap an early quarrel with the bride."

"'Tis strange, forsooth, to find the bridegroom alone at this hour,"
added Stowmaries, whilst the refrain of a ribald song rose somewhat
affectedly to his lips.

But Rochester quickly checked him, for Michael's footstep was heard on
the landing. The latter now entered, closely followed by M. Blond who
carried a couple of candelabra of heavy metal and fitted with tallow
candles.

These he soon lighted and the flickering yellow flames quickly
dispersed the gloom which lingered in the corners of the room. They
threw into full relief the faces of the four men, three of whom
retained an expression of great bewilderment, whilst the fourth looked
serene and placid, as if the entertaining of his friends was for nonce
the most momentous thing in his existence.

Michael went to the window and with a quick, impatient gesture he
pulled the curtains together, shutting out the moonlit landscape
and the silhouette of the trees, whose soft sighs had been the
accompaniment to the murmur of her voice; mayhap he had a thought of
shutting out at the same time the very remembrance of the past.

Then he turned once more to the others and his face now was a perfect
mirror of jovial good-humour as he said gaily:

"I hope, gentlemen, that you are anhungered. As for me I could devour
a wilderness of frogs, so be it that it is the only food of which
this remarkable country can boast. I pray you sit. Supper will not be
long--and in the meanwhile tell me, pray, the latest gossip in London."

The company settled itself around the table. Every one was glad enough
to be rid of the uncanny sensation of awhile ago. M. Blond in the
meanwhile had bustled out of the room but he soon reappeared bearing
platters and spoons, and, what was more to the purpose, pewter mugs and
huge tankards of good red wine. Close behind him came his portly spouse
holding aloft with massive, outstretched arms, the monumental tureen
whence escaped the savoury fumes of her famous croûte-au-pot.

Loud cheers greeted the arrival of the worthy pair. Mme. Blond quickly
fell to, distributing the soup with no niggardly hand, the while her
man made the round, filling the mugs with excellent wine.

Gossip became general. Rochester as usual was full of anecdotes, bits
of scandal and gossip, retailed with a free tongue and an inexhaustible
fund of somewhat boisterous humour. The soup was beyond reproach and
the wine more than drinkable.

"Gad's 'ounds," he cried presently when Blond and his wife had retired,
leaving the English company to itself, "this is a feast fit for the
gods! Michael Kestyon, our amiable host, I raise my glass to thee!
Gentlemen, our host!"

He raised his glass, Stowmaries following suit; but Ayloffe checked
them both with a peremptory lifting of his hand.

"Nay, nay!" he said, "my lord Rochester you do forget--and you, too,
gentlemen! Fie on you, fie, I say! Not a drop shall pass your lips
until you have pledged me as you should. 'Tis I will give you the first
toast of the evening. Gentlemen, the bride!"

There was loud clapping of mugs against the table, then lusty shouts of
"The bride! the bride!" The three men raised their bumpers and drained
them to the last drop, honouring the toast to the full. Sir John looked
keenly at Michael, but even his sharp, observant eyes could not detect
the slightest change in the calm and serene face. Michael, too, had
raised his mug, but Ayloffe noted that he did not touch the wine with
his lips.

Shrewd Sir John ever alive to his own interests fell to speculating as
to what had gone amiss, and whether any event had been likely to occur
which would affect his own prospects in any way. Mistress Peyton's
twelve thousand pounds had not yet--remember,--been transferred to
Cousin John's pocket, and no one was more profoundly aware of the
truth of the old dictum that "there's many a slip--" than was Sir John
Ayloffe himself. But there was naught to read on Michael Kestyon's
placid face, only the vague suspicion of carefully concealed weariness;
and in Ayloffe's practical mind there was something distinctly
unnatural in the serene calm of a man who was richer to-day by one
hundred and twenty thousand pounds, not even to mention an excessively
pretty and well-dowered bride.

Sir John, relying on his own powers of observation, had every intention
of probing this matter to the bottom, but in the meanwhile he thought
it best not to let the others see, too clearly, what he himself had
only vaguely guessed, therefore it was he again who shouted more
lustily even than before:

"Now the bridegroom, gentlemen! I give you the bridegroom! Long live!
Long live I say!"

He was on his feet waving his mug with every lusty shout. Then he
drained it once more to the last drop, Stowmaries and Rochester doing
likewise, for time-honoured custom demanded that such toasts must be
responded to right heartily. Michael however made no acknowledgment as
he should have done. He sat quite still with slender, nervy fingers
idly toying with the crumbs on the table.

"Respond, Michael, respond," cried Lord Rochester who seemed to
have quite shaken off his former diffidence. "Man, are you in the
clouds?--Of a surety," he continued with a knowing wink directed at his
friends, "'twere no marvel on this eventful night, and with a pretty
bride awaiting her lord not thirty paces away on the other side of that
door. We saw her in church, Michael, and by Gad, man, you are a lucky
dog! But we did drink to the bridegroom and--"

"And I, too, drink to him," interposed Michael loudly, as he rose to
his feet, bumper in hand and turned directly to his Cousin Stowmaries,
"to you, my lord and cousin do I drink--the only bridegroom worthy of
such a bride."

To say the least of it, this speech was vastly astonishing. No one
quite knew how to take it, and as Michael drained his cup Stowmaries
broke into a forced laugh.

"You do flatter me, Coz," he said, feeling strangely uncomfortable
under the other's steady gaze, and realising that some sort of reply
was expected of him, "but of a truth the flattery is misplaced. The
bride is yours and you have won her by fair means; and I, in my turn,
will add something to my lord Rochester's toast--something which, an
I mistake not, will be vastly acceptable to you--a draft for seventy
thousand pounds on my banker, Master Vivish of Fleet Street. The final
payment of my debt to you."

And Stowmaries took a paper from the pocket of his surcoat and handed
it to Michael, who made no movement to take it.

"Cousin," he said, "when I accepted the bargain which you offered me,
I was more deeply in my cups than I myself had any idea of. Let us
admit that 'twas an ignoble bargain, shameful alike to me and to you.
Now I would pray you to return that draft to your pocket; 'tis but
little I have spent of that first fifty thousand pounds, the balance
of what remains you shall have on my return to London, as for the
rest--that which I have so foolishly spent--I pray you to grant me a
few months delay and I will repay you to the full. Thus we two who made
the bargain, and these two gentlemen who witnessed it, will cease to
have aught but a dim recollection of the shameful doings of a mad and
roisterous night."

Silence greeted this strange speech. The beginning of it had at once
awakened surprise, the end left the three men there present in a
state of complete puzzlement. Stowmaries frankly gazed at Michael
with wide-open eyes wherein good-humoured contempt fought with utter
amazement.

Then as no one spoke, Michael added quietly:

"I await your answer, Cousin."

"Tush, man, you are joking," retorted Stowmaries with a shrug of the
shoulders.

"I never was more serious in my life," rejoined the other with deep
earnestness, "and 'tis a serious answer that I ask of you."

"But I know not to what your lengthy speech did tend, how can I give it
answer?"

"I asked you to put that draft for money yet unpaid into your pocket; I
propose to repay you in full every penny of that which this folly hath
already cost you, and you on the other hand can fulfil your obligations
to the lady who, of a truth, is still legally your wife."

"Hold on, man, hold on!" cried Stowmaries almost in dismay, for it
seemed to him that his cousin was bereft of his senses. "Odd's fish!
But you talk like a madman--and a dangerous one, too, for you use words
which, were I not your guest, I could not help but resent."

"There is naught to resent, Cousin, in what I say, nor is it the act or
speech of a madman to ask you to rescind a bargain which tended neither
to your honour nor to mine own."

"But, by the Mass, Cousin, the bargain good or bad, righteous or
shameful, is no longer in the making. Even were I so minded--which
by our Lady I vow that I am not--I could not now release you of your
pledged word to me. What is done, is done, and you have fulfilled your
share of the bargain. Now 'tis my turn as an honourable gentlemen to
acquit myself of my debt to you. So I pray you take the money--it is
justly yours--but do not prate any further nonsense."

"Ay! ay! friend Kestyon," added Ayloffe with his habitual bonhomme,
through which nevertheless the cloven hoof of sarcasm was quite
perceptible, "do not allow your over-sensitive conscience to persuade
you into refusing what is justly your due."

"Odd's fish, man, you have won the bride and thereby rendered
Stowmaries an incomparable service," quoth Lord Rochester decisively,
"and--"

He was about to say more but Michael interrupted him.

"I pray you, gentlemen," he said, "grant me patience for awhile; I
fear me that my gentle cousin did not altogether grasp my meaning.
Cousin," he added, turning once more fully to Stowmaries, "will you
put your money back into your pocket and instead of fulfilling your
engagements to me, fulfil them toward the lady who hath first claims on
your loyalty?"

"Tush, man!" retorted Stowmaries, who was waxing wrathful, "cannot you
cease that senseless talk? The thing is done, man, the thing is done.
Gad! We none of us want it undone, nor could we an we would."

"My lord of Stowmaries is right," concluded Lord Rochester decisively,
"and you, Kestyon, do but run your head against a stone wall. An you
feel remorse, I for one am sorry for you--but what has been, has been.
You no more can withdraw from your present position than you could
erase from the Book of Life all that has passed to-day. So take your
money, man, you have the right to it. Odd's fish! A hundred and twenty
thousand pounds, and you talk of flinging it as a sop to your perturbed
conscience."

"Who talked of conscience, my lord?" rejoined Michael haughtily, "or
yet of remorse? Surely not I. We have all been gambling on an issue,
and I now offer my cousin of Stowmaries his own stakes back again an
he'll pay his just debt to his wife rather than to me."

"My wife, man, are you joking!" retorted Stowmaries hotly. "After what
has occurred, think you I would take for my countess--"

"The purest, most exquisite woman, Cousin, that ever graced a man's
ancestral home," interposed Michael earnestly. "To say less of her were
blasphemy."

"Pshaw!" ejaculated Stowmaries with ill-concealed contempt.

"Cousin, I swear to you," reiterated Michael with solemn emphasis,
"by all that men hold most sacred, by all that I hold most holy, that
the lady is as pure to-day as when her baby hand was placed in yours
eighteen years ago, in token that she was to be your wife. She is as
worthy to be the wife of a good man, the mother of loyal children, as I
am unfit to tie the laces of her shoe. An you'll do your duty by her,
you'll never regret it--all that you will regret will be the memory of
that turbulent night when in your madness you thought of wronging her!"

"By God, man, I swear that you are crazy!" cried Stowmaries whose
impatience had been visibly growing and who now gave full rein to his
exasperation. "Are you a damned, canting Puritan that you talk to me
like that? Nay, an you wish to be rid of yon baggage, send her back
to the tailor's back shop whence she came,--throw her out into the
streets,--I care not what you do with her, but in G--d's name I tell
you that you shall not palm off on to my mother's son a cast-off troll
whom you no longer want."

But even before the words had fully escaped the young man's lips
Michael had lifted his glass and thrown its full contents in the face
of the blasphemer.

Sickened and blinded with his own fury and the pungent odour of the
wine which poured down his face into his eyes and mouth, Stowmaries
uttered a violent oath and the next instant had sprung upon his kinsman
like an infuriated and raging beast, and had him by the throat even
before Ayloffe and Rochester who had quickly jumped to their feet were
able to interfere.

The onslaught was vigorous and sudden and Stowmaries' fury hot and
uncontrolled. But Michael who throughout the wordy warfare had kept his
own temper in check, who had foreseen the attack even when he threw the
wine in the younger man's face, had already grasped Stowmaries' wrists
with a steel-like pressure of his own nervy hands, causing the other
to relax his grip and forcing an involuntary cry of pain to escape his
throat.

"Nay, Cousin," he said, still speaking quite quietly, but with a slight
tone of contempt now, "in a hand-to-hand struggle you would fare worse
than I. Have I hurt your wrist? Then am I deeply grieved--but 'tis not
broken I assure you--and you know, dear Coz, that since you are still
my debtor, you could not in honour kill me until you had acquitted
yourself of your debt to me. I have offered you a fair way of paying
that debt, not to me but to her to whom you really owe it. An you'll
keep your money now, and take back all you've given me, an you'll
fulfil your sacred promise to take Rose Marie for wife, you'll be the
happiest man on God's earth. This I swear to you, and also that I'll
serve you humbly and devotedly as servant or as slave to the last day
of my life and with the last drop of blood in my veins. After that an
you wish to kill me--why, my life is at your service. Will you do it,
Cousin? God and his army of saints and of angels will give you rich
reward."

But Stowmaries who with a sulky look on his face was readjusting the
lace ruffles at his wrist whilst glowering at the man whose physical
strength he had just been made to feel, turned on him now with an evil
sneer.

"You seem to be intimately acquainted with the heavenly hierarchy,
Cousin," he said, "but, believe me, I have no intention of entering
those celestial spheres which are of your own imagining and of which
you seem to be the self-constituted guardian."

"Sneer at me as much as you will, Cousin, but give me answer," urged
Michael and for the first time his voice shook as he uttered this
final, desperate appeal, "'Twere best for you--this I entreat you to
believe. Best for you and right for her. As for me, I no longer exist;
the ignoble bargain has never been; wipe it out, Cousin, even from your
memory. Take back your money and with it your honour. She is worthy of
your love, of your faith and of your trust; take her to your heart,
Cousin, take her for she is as pure as the Madonna and you will be
richer by all that she can give, the priceless guerdon of her exquisite
womanhood."

The other two men were silent. They had taken no part in the discussion
and had listened to it each with vastly divers emotions. Rochester,
a noble gentleman despite his many extravagances, could not help but
admire the man who thus stood up boldly to right a wrong, fearless
of consequences, fearless of ridicule. But Ayloffe merely hoped that
Michael's rugged eloquence, his earnest, passionate appeal would
fail to reach the armour of selfishness and vanity which effectually
enveloped Stowmaries' better nature.

Now after this last appeal there was a pause. The storm of turbulent
passions was lulled to momentary rest, the better to gather strength
for the final conflict.

"Take her to your heart, Cousin," Michael had urged, and no one there
could guess the infinity of renunciation which lay in this appeal.
Stowmaries was silent for awhile. His glowering eyes expressed nothing
but unyielding obstinacy. Otherwise he was totally unmoved.

Then, keeping his gaze rivetted on Michael, he pointed with
outstretched finger to the paper which lay on the table--the draft for
seventy thousand pounds on Master Vivish of Fleet Street.

"That is my answer, Cousin," he said loudly and firmly. "You have
rendered me a service; for this now I pay you to the full as agreed.
Let there be no more of this crazy talk, for what is done is done, and
you above all should be satisfied."

Once more there was silence in the low-raftered room. A gust of wind
blew the thin curtains way from the open window and caused the scrap of
paper to stir with a soft sound as of a spirit voice that murmured a
warning "Hush!"

Michael had neither moved nor spoken, not a line of his face betrayed
the conflict in his soul. But three pairs of eyes were fixed upon him.
He did not seem to see them, for his own were fixed on the fluttering
curtain which had whispered spectral words to him; between the gently
swaying folds there peeped cold gleams of moonbeam radiance, and from
far away the sighing of the young acacia boughs which had mingled with
her voice awhile ago.

Then he turned his gaze back to the paper which lay before him, still
gently stirring under the soft breath of the evening air. Deliberately
and with a firm hand he took it up, folded it across and across and
slipped it in the inner pocket of his coat.

"You know best, Cousin," he said in a quiet, unmodulated voice. "As you
say, I have rendered you a service. You have paid me in full according
to our bond. We should both be satisfied. And now, gentlemen, shall we
proceed with supper?"




                                PART IV




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                And do you ask what game she plays?
                  With me 'tis lost or won;
                With thee it is playing still; with him
                  It is not well begun;
                But 'tis a game she plays with all
                  Beneath the sway o' the sun.
                                        --DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.


Mistress Julia Peyton felt a trifle worried. Matters had not turned out
exactly as she had anticipated; it is a way peculiar to matters over
which we have no control.

She had been quite aware of the fact that my lord of Stowmaries, with
Sir John Ayloffe and Lord Rochester, had made the journey over to Paris
in order to be present at the marriage of Michael Kestyon with the
tailor's daughter, and it had been with the intention of frustrating
my lord's desire to pay his final debt of seventy thousand pounds
to Michael that she had sent old Daniel Pye over in the gentlemen's
company, armed with the letters writ in scholarly French by the exiled
Huguenot clerk and intended for good M. Legros' personal perusal.

Mistress Peyton had no special wish to save the susceptibilities of a
tailor's wench, and cared little whether the fraud was discovered by
her before she had left her father's home or afterwards, but--she had
argued this out in her own mind over and over again--if the girl never
actually left her father's house, my lord would not in honour be bound
to pay Michael the additional seventy thousand pounds, since the latter
would not have accomplished his own share of the bargain to the full.
On the other hand there would be quite enough public scandal and gossip
round the girl, as it was, to enable my lord of Stowmaries to justify
his repudiation of the matrimonial bonds, contracted eighteen years
ago, on the grounds that the future Countess of Stowmaries no longer
bore a spotless reputation.

That had been Mistress Peyton's subtle argument, and on the basis of
this unanswerable logic she had laid her plans. Caring nothing for the
girl, she cared everything for the money, and above all for the power
that so vast a sum would place in Michael's hand for the furtherance of
his own case.

Daniel Pye had returned to England about a week after the wedding
at St. Gervais. He was an unblushing liar, both by habit and by
temperament. Therefore, when he presented himself before his mistress,
he assured her that he had handed her letter over to the master tailor
even while the wedding festivities were in progress in the back shop,
and long before the coach bore the bridal pair away.

When Mistress Peyton heard the circumstantial narrative of how her
faithful henchman had fought his way into the tailor's house at peril
of his life, and had given the letter into M. Legros' own hands, the
while his own poor shoulders were bruised and well-nigh broken with
the blows dealt to him by cruel miscreants who strove to hinder him
from performing his duty--when the fair Julia heard all this, I say,
she was vastly pleased and commended Master Pye very highly for his
faithfulness, and I believe even rewarded him by giving him five
shillings.

The wedding it seems had been the talk of Paris, ladies and gentlemen
from the Court had been present thereat, and Mme. de Montespan had
loudly praised the handsome presence of the bridegroom. All this was
passing satisfactory, and Mistress Julia was quite content to think
that the tailor and his family would--after such an esclandre--be
only too willing to hide their humble heads out of the ken of society
wherein they had become a laughing stock.

On legal grounds my lord of Stowmaries could readily command the
nullity of the child-marriage now; as for the religious grounds
which had been the chief stumbling-block hitherto--"Bah!" argued the
fair Julia naïvely to herself, "His Holiness the Pope of Rome is a
gentleman; he will not expect an English grand seigneur to acknowledge
as his countess the cast-off plaything of an adventurer."

The disappointment came some three or four days later when Cousin
John in his turn presented himself at the little house in Holborn
Row. Of course he had known nothing of his fair cousin's treacherous
little scheme, and although he had greatly wondered at Master Pye's
presence in Paris at the time of the wedding, yet he had been far from
suspecting the truth with regard to its purport. All that good Sir John
knew was that the bridal pair did leave the house of M. Legros in a
somewhat unconventional style, for this he had been told by the gaffers
of the neighbourhood.

He had not seen the departure, but had heard glowing accounts of it all
from one or two of the spectators whom he had closely questioned.

There was no doubt that it had been a fine departure: romantic and
epoch-making. No fear now of the scandal being in any way hushed up.
"Milor the Englishman," as that rascal Michael had been universally
called in that quarter of Paris wherein his prowess had been
witnessed, was a magnificent horseman, so the gossips declared with
one accord. The way he had jumped on his horse, using neither stirrup
nor bridle, was a sight good for sore eyes, then two of his English
serving-men had raised the bride to his saddle bow, and after a lusty
shout of farewell milor had ridden away with her, and soon his horse
was head galloping at maddening speed. Never had such a spectacle been
witnessed in the streets of Paris before; the gaffers were still agape
at the remembrance of it, and it had all seemed more like a vivid and
exciting dream than like sober reality.

But no sooner had milor and the bride disappeared round the bend of the
narrow street than the first breath of gossip rose--apparently from
nothingness--in their wake. Whence it originated nobody knew, but sure
it is that within an hour the whole of the quarter was agog with the
scandal. Cousin John prided himself on the fact that he had contributed
more than his share in spreading the report from one end of Paris to
the other that the daughter of the mightily rich and highly-respectable
tailor-in-chief of His Majesty the King of France had eloped with
an adventurer, who was even kinsman to her own husband, my lord of
Stowmaries and Rivaulx.

"The scandal is quite immense, fair Cousin," quoth Cousin John
lustily, and with a merry guffaw the while he sat sipping sack-posset
in Mistress Peyton's elegantly furnished boudoir. "Personally I see
naught for the tailor's wench but the inevitable nunnery, although
Michael--but of this more anon. In the meanwhile Mme. de Montespan
dotes on the adventure. Lord Rochester retailed it all to her outside
the church porch, and you may well believe that it hath lost naught in
the telling. She quite fell in love with Michael's handsome presence,
and His Majesty the King of France vows that English gentlemen are the
primest rogues on this earth; and even sober diplomatists aver that
Michael's prowess and Michael's romantic personality have done more to
cement international friendship than a whole host of secret treaties.
From the Court the scandal hath reached the lower classes of Paris, all
thanks to your humble servant, so I flatter myself; the tailor and his
family are the butt of every quip-maker in the city. There is a rhyme
that goes the round which--nay, your pardon, fair Cousin, I could not
repeat it for fear of offending your ears, but let me assure you that
the heroine thereof is not like to petition Monseigneur the Archbishop
of Paris or His Holiness the Pope to assert her rights to be Countess
of Stowmaries--Countess of Stowmaries," added Sir John with another
prolonged guffaw, "Countess of Stowmaries! Odd's fish! In Paris they
sing of her: '_Une vertu ingulière_--' your pardon--your pardon again,
dear Coz, I was forgetting--"

And Cousin John had indeed to stop in his narration, for he was choking
for very laughter and the tears were streaming down his ruddy cheeks.

Mistress Peyton had listened to the cheerful tale with but
ill-repressed impatience, and had not Sir John been so absorbed in
what was his favourite topic of conversation--the tearing to shreds
of a woman's reputation--he would not have failed to notice that his
kinswoman was far from sharing his own hilarity.

Of a truth, the fair Julia's impatience soon gave place to great anger,
for it was by now quite clear to her that Daniel Pye had failed in
his trust, that he had not only lied like a consummate rogue, but had
actually by his unforgivable delinquency caused his mistress' most
cherished and carefully-conceived counter-intrigue to come absolutely
to naught.

Michael Kestyon had carried off the bride and Lord Stowmaries could not
now as a man of honour refuse to pay him that final seventy thousand
pounds; a fortune, forsooth, wherewith the adventurer, the wastrel, the
haunter of brothels and booths could now make good his claim to the
title and peerage of Stowmaries and Rivaulx.

Given a dissolute, money-grabbing king on whose decision the claim
for the peerage rested, given this adventure which rendered Michael
interesting to those who had the ear of Charles Stuart, and what more
likely than that the present lord of Stowmaries should find himself in
the terrible position of having paid for his own undoing?

And all because a fool of a serving-man had failed in doing what he
had been ordered to do, and this in despite of the most carefully
thought-out plans, most ardent wishes and most subtle schemes. We may
take it that visions of a terrible retribution to be wreaked on that
rascally Daniel Pye already found birth in his mistress' inventive
brain; and whilst good Cousin John was wiping the tears of laughter
which his own narrative had called to his bulgy eyes, his fair cousin
was meditating on the best pretext she could employ for ordering Pye to
be lawfully and publicly flogged.

At last Mistress Peyton's sullen silence brought Cousin John back from
the pleasing realms of gossip and scandal. Looking into her face he saw
anger, where he had expected to witness a smile of triumph; he also saw
two perfect lips closed tightly in obvious moodiness, the while he had
looked forward to unstinted praise for his own share in the furtherance
of her desires.

Cousin John, therefore, was vastly astonished. Puzzlement in its turn
yielded to speculation. Mistress Julia was angered--why? She had
desired the scandal; now she seemed to resent it. Something had gone
amiss then--or had she veered round in her intentions?

Women were strange cattle in Sir John Ayloffe's estimation. Had his
ambitious cousin perchance nurtured some counter-scheme of her own,
which had come to naught through the success of the original intrigue?
It almost seemed like it from the wrathful expression of her face.

The presence of Daniel Pye in Paris came back to Sir John as a swift
memory. There had been a counter-intrigue then?

Of a truth this would trouble him but little, provided that such
intrigue did not affect the due payment to himself of the twelve
thousand pounds promised by the capricious lady. But of this guerdon he
felt fully assured. Which is another proof of the truth of the ancient
adage which says that there's many a slip 'twixt cup and lip, and also
of the fact that women are far keener diviners of such untoward slips
than are those who belong to the sterner and less intuitive sex.

Even while the prospect of those pleasing thousands was flitting--all
unbeknown to him--further and further from his future grasp, Sir John,
studying his cousin's unaccountable mood tried to make some of his
wonted cynical maxims anent the motives and emotions of the other sex
fit the present situation.

Mistress Peyton was angered when she should have been pleased. Had she
perchance conceived an attachment for the romantic blackguard? Such
things were possible--women's tastes ever erred on the queer side--and
this would certainly account for Julia's impatient anger when she
heard of Michael's interesting departure with the beautiful bride in
his arms.

Nay then! if this was the case, good Cousin John had still the cream
of his narrative in reserve, and the final episode which he had to
relate would of a surety satisfy the most rancorous feelings of revenge
harboured against a hated rival by any fair monster that wore petticoat.

And at the moment that Mistress Peyton finally decided in her own mind
that an accusation of theft preferred by herself against Daniel Pye
would bring that elderly reprobate to the whipping post and the stocks,
Cousin John's mellifluent voice broke in upon these pleasant dreams.

"Odd's fish, fair Coz," he said loudly and emphatically, for he desired
his words to rouse her from her absorption, "imagine our surprise,
nay, our consternation when on our arrival at St. Denis we found one
solitary turtledove mourning over the absence of the other--"

The effect of these words was instantaneous. The fair Julia's thoughts
suddenly flew from prospective vengeance to present interests, and
though the frown did not disappear from her brow, her eyes flashed
eagerness now rather than anger.

"What nonsense is this?" she queried with a show of petulance. "I pray
you, Cousin, speak with less imagery. The matter is of serious portent
to me as you know--and also to yourself," she added significantly, "and
I fear me that my poor wits are too dull to follow the circumlocutions
of your flowery speech."

Sir John smiled complacently; he was quite satisfied that he once more
held his cousin's undivided attention, and resumed his narrative with
imperturbable good-humour.

"I crave your pardon, fair lady," he said, "but on my honour 'tis
just as I have told you. My lord of Stowmaries, Lord Rochester and
your humble servant did journey by coach to St. Denis, for we knew
that thither was the bridal couple bound. We drove in the lumbering
vehicle on God-forsaken roads all the way from Paris, and never in
all my life did I experience such uncomfortable journeying. 'Milor
the Englishman,' quoth Rochester as soon as his feet had touched the
ground, 'is he abed?' For you must know that it was then nigh on ten of
the clock and the hostelry of the Three Archangels looked as dark as
pitch from within and without. 'Milor is upstairs,' exclaimed mine host
who, of a surety, looked vastly bewildered at our arrival. He seemed
like a man bursting with news, and as if eager to explain something,
but we were too impatient to pay any heed to him at the time and ran
helter-skelter upstairs in the wake of Lord Rochester who, as you
know, is ever in the forefront in a spicy adventure, and who moreover
was eager for another peep at the bride, whom he had greatly admired
during the religious ceremony in the church. We none of us had any idea
that anything could be amiss, and as I have had the honour of assuring
you, our consternation was great when on entering the parlour we found
Michael standing by the open window, staring moodily out into the
dreary landscape, the room itself in total darkness, and--as we learnt
afterwards--the bride gone back to Paris by coach in company with her
father."

"Impossible," ejaculated Mistress Peyton, feigning surprise which of a
truth she did not feel. What had been and still was a mystery to Sir
John was clear enough to his fair cousin, and there was, it seems, some
slight attenuation to Daniel Pye's monstrous delinquency. The letter,
by some idiotic blunder on the part of old Pye, had reached Master
Legros just a trifle too late, but it had reached him at last, and the
infuriated father had contrived to reach St. Denis in time to snatch
his daughter away from the arms of the adventurer--who thus stood
prematurely unmasked.

"Impossible!" she reiterated the while Sir John like a true raconteur,
having succeeded in capturing her interest, made an effective pause
in his narration. He could not complain of her moodiness now, for she
seemed all eagerness and agitation.

"True, nevertheless," he asserted quietly, "the bride was gone and
Michael--left desolate--seemed inclined to act like a man bereft of his
senses."

"How mean you that?" she asked.

"He had, it seems, fallen madly in love with the tailor's daughter, and
had no doubt during his hours of loneliness been assailed with remorse
at what he chose to call a shameful bargain."

Again Cousin John paused; his large, prominent eyes were fixed once
more upon his cousin. Clearly there was an undercurrent of intrigue
going on here of which he did not as yet possess the entire secret,
for he had distinctly noted that at his last words the deep frown
which had still lingered on Julia's snow-white brow now vanished
completely, giving place to an excited look of hope. Something of the
inner workings of her mind began to dawn on him, however, a vague,
indefinable sense of what had gone before, what she had feared, and
what she now hoped. Therefore he waited awhile, watching her eager,
impatient face, the play of her delicate features, the nervous
movements of her hands, ere he resumed with well-simulated carelessness.

"Ay! my dear Coz, the more I think on it, the more am I convinced that
Michael in his love-sickness became bereft of reason, for you'll scarce
believe it when I tell you that when my lord of Stowmaries desired to
acquit himself like an honourable gentleman of his debt to his kinsman,
and held out to him the draft for seventy thousand pounds, Michael
refused to take it."

This time there was no mistaking the look of pleasure which lit up
the fair Julia's face. A less acute observer than was Sir John would
have realised at once that this last item of news was essentially
pleasant to the hearer. Mistress Peyton of a truth, found her anxieties
vanishing away, and was at no pains to hide the pleasure which she
felt. Hope was returning to her heart, also gratitude towards Fate who,
it seems, had been kind enough after all to play into her hands.

Psychologically the situation was interesting, and we may assume that
Cousin John was no longer at sea now. He might not yet possess the key
which opened the magic gate into his fair cousin's secret orchard, but
he was essentially a gambler, an unscrupulous schemer himself; money,
to him, was the all-powerful solution of many an obscure puzzle.

The mention of money had brought on the beautiful face before him the
first smile of satisfaction since the beginning of his narrative;
ergo, argued Cousin John, the fair mistress entered into a private,
villainous little scheme of her own, of calling the tune without paying
the piper. Women have no sense of honour, where debts between gentlemen
are concerned.

Once on a track, Sir John was quick enough to follow the puzzle to its
satisfactory solution. But he was not pleased that his cousin, and
partner in the whole enterprise, should thus have intrigued without
his knowledge or counsel. Heavens above, if conspirators did not work
together, every plot, however well laid, would speedily abort. Women
were ever ready for these petty infamies; they seemed to revel in them,
to plan and scheme them even if--as in this case--they were wholly
superfluous.

He was angry with his pretty cousin, and showed it by keeping her on
tenter-hooks, dropping his narrative and ostentatiously draining a mug
of posset to its last drop. He would force her, he thought, to disclose
her treacherous little hand to the full.

And he succeeded, for as he did not speak she was quite unable to curb
her impatience.

"Then--the money--" she asked with obviously affected indifference,
"what became of it?"

"The money?" he asked blandly "What money?"

"The seventy thousand pounds," she said, "which Michael Kestyon was to
receive and which he refused to take."

Cousin John looked at her over the top of his goblet, his round, bulgy
eyes told her quite plainly that he had read her through and through,
and that he for one was not sorry that her little counter-scheme had
failed, since she had not thought fit to ask his advice. But he said
quite lightly, as one who speaks of a trifle too mean to dwell in the
memory:

"Oh! the seventy thousand pounds! They are where they should be, dear
Cousin, in Michael Kestyon's pocket. The just reward for his services
rendered to his kinsman, your future lord, fair Coz!"

"But you said just now--" she stammered on the verge of tears, for the
sudden sense of disappointment had been very bitter to bear.

"I said that Michael had been smitten with remorse, and had at first
refused to take the money, but Lord Stowmaries soon overcame his
scruples and--"

"Lord Stowmaries is a fool!" she interrupted hotly.

Sir John feigned great astonishment.

"A fool? For acquitting himself of a debt of honour?" he asked in tones
of mild reproof.

"Ay! a fool, and thrice a fool," she reiterated with increased
vehemence, for she was no gaby and was not taken in now by Cousin
John's blandness. He had divined her thoughts, and guessed something
of her aborted plans; there was no occasion therefore to subdue her
annoyance any longer. "An Michael Kestyon was such a dotard as to
refuse a fortune," she continued, "why should my lord Stowmaries be
the one to force it upon him. Nay! The whole bargain was iniquitous or
worse. Ridiculous it was of a truth--one hundred and twenty thousand
pounds to a man who would have done the trick for so many pence. I
marvelled at you, Cousin, for lending a hand to such wanton waste and
did my best to circumvent your folly, but thanks to that dolt Daniel
Pye, and apparently to my lord Stowmaries' idiocy, Michael Kestyon
is now in possession of the means whereby he can divest the cousin
who paid him so well not only of his title but of all his wealth. A
blunder, Cousin, an idiotic, silly blunder," she added as she jumped
to her feet, unable to sit still, tramping up and down the room like a
raging wildcat, lashing herself into worse fury by picturing all the
evils which the unfortunate business would bring in its train, chief
amongst these being my lord Stowmaries' undoing, for which she really
cared naught only in so long as it affected her own prospects.

"The silly adventure is already the talk of the town; the king has
asked to see Michael Kestyon. Bah! The man sold his kingdom, the
liberty and dignity of England for a sum not much larger than what
Michael can now offer him for a favourable decision in a peerage claim.
Ye saints above! what fools men are! what blind, blundering, silly
fools, the moment they begin to prate of honour!"

Cousin John had allowed his fair cousin's vehement vituperations
to pass unchallenged over his humbled head. That there was some
truth in her argument he himself could not deny, and it was a fact
that fears very akin to her own in the matter of the money had more
than once crossed his mind. Feeling, therefore, that the reproof,
though exceptionally violent, was not undeserved, he dropped his
bland, cynical manner, and when at last the fair Julia paused in her
invectives, chiefly for lack of breath, and also because tears of
anger were choking her voice, he spoke to her quite quietly and almost
apologetically.

"Indeed, Coz," he said, "I would have you believe that I am deeply
touched by your reproaches, which, alas, I may have merited to a
certain extent. Zeal in your cause may have rendered me less far-seeing
than I really should have been, considering what we both have at stake.
But let me tell you also that I have not been quite such a dolt as you
seem to think. You are quite wrong in supposing that Michael Kestyon
would have acted the part which he did for a less sum than we have
given him. Nothing but a real substantial fortune would have tempted
Michael. Nothing," reiterated Sir John emphatically, seeing that Julia
made a contemptuous gesture of incredulity. "He is a curious mixture
of the wastrel and the gentleman; if we could not satisfy his ambition,
we could not attack his sense of honour. Where we made the mistake was
in thinking that a substantial sum would satisfy him in itself. No one
guessed that his dormant claim to the peerage of Stowmaries was still
of such vital importance to him. He had ceased to move actively in the
matter partly through the lack of money, but also in part through the
moral collapse which he has undergone in the past two years. I confess
that I did think that when he was possessed of his newly-acquired
fortune, he would continue the life of dissolute vagabondage which we
all believed had become his second--nay, his only nature. It seems that
we were all mistaken--"

"What do you mean? Has anything occurred already?" asked Julia, who
found all her fears increased tenfold at Cousin John's seriously-spoken
words.

"No! No! No!" he said reassuringly, "nothing at present, save that
Michael Kestyon has made no attempt to return to his boon companions in
the various brothels which were wont to be his haunts. Rumour hath it
that he is oft seen in the company of my lord Shaftesbury, and there
is no doubt that the king was vastly amused by the adventure. Some say
that royal smiles are the sure precursors to royal favours. But between
entertaining Charles II with tales of spicy adventures and obtaining
actual decisions from him in important matters lie vast gulfs of kingly
indifference and of kindly indolence. There is nothing that the king
hates worse than the giving of a decision, and, believe me, that he
will dilly-dally with Michael until that young reprobate will have
spent every penny of his new fortune, and will have none left to offer
as a bribe to our merry monarch. It is not cheap, believe me, to be a
temporary boon companion to Charles Stuart, and a great deal more than
a hundred thousand pounds would have to pass through Michael's fingers
in keeping up a certain gentlemanly state, in tailor's accounts, in
bets and in losses at hazard, before the king would think of rewarding
him in the only manner which would compensate him for all the money
expended in obtaining the royal smiles."

"You may be right, Cousin," said Mistress Peyton, somewhat reassured,
"at the same time a great deal of anxiety would have been saved me, if
that old liar Daniel Pye had done as he was bid. But he shall rue his
prevarications, and bitterly, too."

"You may wreak what vengeance you will, fair Cousin, on the varlet who
hath disobeyed you. But I entreat you to keep your favours for those
who have tried to serve you to the best of their poor abilities. As
for the rest, let me assure you now that Michael Kestyon refused the
seventy thousand pounds and even offered to repay the first instalment
of fifty thousand on terms which were wholly unacceptable to Lord
Stowmaries. The chief condition being that my lord should rescind the
whole of the bargain, and take the tailor's wench back into his heart
and marital bosom. You see, fair Coz, how impossible it was to treat
with Michael at all, and we certainly were not to blame. My lord of
Stowmaries is still the happiest man on earth; glad enough to have
purchased his happiness for one hundred and twenty thousand pounds. An
I mistake not he is in Rome now, awaiting the Pope's decision--but that
is a foregone conclusion. Monseigneur the Archbishop hath assured him
of his cooperation. Soon my lord will receive that for which he craves:
religious dispensation to avail himself of the civil law of England
which will readily grant him nullity of marriage, and the blessing
of the Pope himself on his remarriage with the fairest beauty that
e'er hath graced an ancestral home. Until then I entreat you, Cousin,"
added Sir John with elaborate gallantry, "to smooth away those frowns
of anxiety which ill become the future Countess of Stowmaries. Let me
see you smile, dear Coz, ere I take my leave, having, I trust, assured
you that you have no truer servant than your faithful kinsman, the
recipient of your favours, and, I trust, of many more in the not very
distant future."

There was no resisting Cousin John's assurance and his smile of
confident encouragement. Mistress Peyton did allow the wrinkles of
anger to fade from her smooth brow. But complete peace of mind was not
restored to her in full; she was almost glad that "the happiest man on
earth" was away from her just now. She wanted to think matters over
in absolute quietude, away from her good cousin's bland platitudes.
It almost seemed as if Fate had reshuffled all her cards; she and
her partners in the great life-gamble, Lord Stowmaries, Sir John and
Michael Kestyon, too, had had fresh hands dealt to them. They needed
sorting and the game mayhap reconsidering.

It was even doubtful at the present moment what was the chief trump
card. Daniel Pye with his clumsy fingers had abstracted one out of
his mistress' hand. At thought of that the frown returned and the
"fairest beauty that e'er graced an ancestral home" looked not unlike
a vengeful termagant gloating over the petty revenge which--in a small
measure--would compensate her for all anxieties past, present and to
come.




                              CHAPTER XXX

                  How! Old thief thy wits are lame;
                  To clip such it is no shame;
                  I rede you in the devil's name,
                  Ye come not here to make men game.
                                                    --SWINBURNE.


Daniel Pye, having arrived at that corner stone in Holborn Row
which afforded him a full view of the house whence he had just been
ignominiously dismissed, turned and shook a menacing fist in its
direction. His body ached, he was smarting in every limb, and he had a
grievance which clamoured loudly for revenge.

In Paris he had endured, whilst executing his duty, the buffetings and
blows of a crowd of rowdy apprentices; this he had done not from any
deep-rooted attachment to a capricious and exacting mistress, nor from
any very exalted notions of abstract duty, but chiefly for the sake of
the commendations and the rewards which the due fulfilment to Mistress
Peyton's commands would naturally bring in its train.

The fact that, in order to allay the futile anxieties of a pretty
woman, good Daniel Pye subsequently went in for a somewhat
highly-coloured tale of his adventures was, after all, a venial sin,
and surely the minor transgression which he had committed in delivering
the letter, half an hour later than he should have done, did not call
for such malignant and cruel treatment as his ungrateful mistress had
thought fit to impose upon him. Under a paltry accusation of theft,
which the lady herself must have known was totally unfounded, she had
handed him over to the magistrate for punishment. Convicted of the
charge on the most flimsy evidence, he had been made to stand in the
pillory two hours, and been publicly flogged like some recalcitrant
'prentice, or immoral wench.

Nay, worse! For Mistress Peyton herself, accompanied by Sir John
Ayloffe, had gone down to Bridewell to see her serving-man whipped,
under the pretence that she wished to see justice properly tempered
with mercy, since she only desired merited chastisement for him and not
wanton cruelty.

And yet when he, Daniel Pye, was howling at the whipping post like one
possessed, the while a crowd of young jackanapes--among whom were some
of Pye's fellow servants--stood hooting and jeering, Sir John Ayloffe
at Mistress Peyton's special command had ordered that an additional
ten strokes with the lash be dealt him with no lenient hand. And when
Daniel anon stood in the pillory, bruised, sore, every limb in his body
aching with the heavy blows, Sir John had caused baskets full of rotten
eggs and scraps of tainted fish and meat and decayed vegetable to be
distributed among the spectators so that the ribald youngsters might
throw this evil-smelling refuse at the unfortunate man whose sole crime
had been a tiny lie spoken in order to reassure an ungrateful mistress.

Finally Pye was dismissed from Mistress Peyton's service, despite his
abject entreaties. He was kicked out of the street door by a young
lacquey whom he himself had oft flogged for impertinence and who now
had already assumed the comfortable shoes of office which Daniel had
worn for so long.

To the last the mistress had persisted in her unfounded and cruel
accusations. To the last she coldly asserted that Daniel had robbed her
of seventy thousand pounds.

Seventy thousand pounds! By Heaven! Daniel was not aware that such a
vast sum existed in the world, nor if he had stolen it--which of course
he had not--would he have known what to do with all that money!

No wonder, therefore, that the man felt mentally as well as bodily
sore--nay, that he swore to be revenged on the cruel lady who had so
wantonly wronged him. What form his revenge would take he could not at
first determine, but these were days when it was not over-difficult for
a man to make his petty spite be very uncomfortably felt, provided he
had nothing more to lose and possessed neither conscience nor fear of
ulterior punishment.

Now Daniel Pye, we know, had no overwhelming regard for truth; as to
punishment, by the Lord, he had had all the punishment that any menial
could possibly receive. He could sink no lower in the hierarchy of
respectable domesticity; he had nothing more to lose, nothing more to
gain. A serving-man who had been publicly flogged for theft was an
outcast as far as gentlemen's houses were concerned. All the service
that a branded thief might obtain in future would be in mean taverns or
places of doubtful reputation where the master could not afford to be
over-particular in the choice of his henchmen.

Pye had indeed shaken a menacing fist at the house in Holborn Row.
Though he had not thought out the exact form which his revenge might
take, he knew by instinct in what quarter to seek for guidance in this
desire.

His steps led him almost mechanically in the direction of Whitefriars.
When he himself was still a respectable lacquey; he would have scorned
to set foot in this unhallowed spot where cheats, liars and other
reprobates rubbed shoulders with the wastrels of aristocratic descent
who had sought sanctuary here against their creditors.

In a corner of the narrow street, and in what had once been the
refectory of white-robed monks, there now stood a tavern of evil
fame--one or two low-raftered rooms, wherein light and air penetrated
in such minute particles that these had not the power to drive away the
heavy fumes of alcohol, of rank tobacco, of vice and of licentiousness
which filled every corner of this dark and squalid spot.

Here the informer, the perjurer, the cheat, held his court unmolested,
here the debtor was free from pursuit, and the highway robber safe from
the arm of the law.

Whitefriars was sanctuary! Oh, the mockery of the word! For it was the
brawlers and the bullies, the termagants and hags that inhabited these
once holy and consecrated precincts, who enforced this self-ordained
law of sanctuary. Neither townguard nor soldiery would dare to enter
the unhallowed neighbourhood save in great numerical strength, and
even then the flails of the lawless fraternity, the bludgeons of the
men and stew-pans and spits of the women oft gained a victory over the
musketeers.

To this spot now Daniel Pye unhesitatingly turned his footsteps. The
servant kicked out of house for theft, the henchman who had been
flogged and had stood in the pillory, naturally drifted towards those
who like himself were at war with law and order, who had quarrelled
with justice or were nursing a grievance.

It was then late in the afternoon. Outside the beautiful May sun was
trying to smile on the grimy city, on all that man had put up in order
to pollute God's pure earth: the evil-smelling, narrow streets, the
pavements oozing with slimy, slippery mud, the rickety, tumble-down
houses covered with dirt and stains. All this the sun had kissed and
touched gently with warmth and promise of spring, but into that corner
of Whitefriars where Daniel Pye now stood, it had not attempted to
penetrate.

Overhead the protruding gables right and left of the street almost met,
obscuring all save a very narrow strip of sky. Underfoot the slimy mud,
fed by innumerable overflowing gutters, hardly gave a foothold to the
passerby.

But the door of the brothel stood invitingly open. Daniel Pye walked in
unchallenged; scarce a head was turned or a glance raised to appraise
the newcomer. He looked sulky and unkempt, his clothes were soiled and
tattered after the painful halt in the pillory. In fact he looked what
he was--a rebel against society like unto themselves.

Men sat in groups conversing in whispers and drinking deeply out
of pewter mugs. One of these groups, more compact than the others,
occupied the centre of the room. In the midst of it a man with thin,
long, yellow hair straggling round a high forehead, his thin shanks
encased in undarned worsted stockings, his stooping shoulders covered
by a surcoat of sad-coloured grogram, seemed to hold a kind of court.

Daniel slouched toward that group; the man in the sad-coloured coat
raised a pair of pale, watery eyes to him, and no doubt recognising by
that subtle instinct peculiar to the great army of blackguards, that
here was a kindred spirit, he made way for the stranger so that the
latter might sit on the bench beside him.

After a very little while Pye found himself quite at home in that
low-raftered room, wherein the air surfeited with evil-smelling fumes
was less foul than the sentiments, the lies, the blasphemies that were
freely emitted here.

The group of whom Mistress Peyton's ex-henchman had now become a
unit, and over which presided the lanky-haired, pale-eyed youth,
consisted of men who had neither the enthusiasm of their own villainy
nor the courage of their own crimes; they were the spies that worked
in the dark, the informers who struck unseen. False oaths, perjured
information, lying accusations were their special trade. It did not
take Daniel Pye very long to learn its secrets.

The man with the yellow hair was called Oates. He had once been a
priest, now he was a renegade, a sacrilegious liar, and maker of false
oaths. Close to him sat another man, outwardly very different to look
at, for he was stout and florid, and his eyes were bleary, but the
perversion of the soul within was equal in these two men. Oates and
Tongue! What a world of infamy do their very names evoke! They were the
leaders of this band of false informers who lived and throve by this
infamous trade. Oates soon made a fortune by those very schemes which
he propounded to his henchmen on this memorable day when Daniel Pye
drifted into their midst.

The East Anglian peasant torn from his primitive home amongst the
wheatfields of Norfolk, transplanted into the vitiated atmosphere of
the great city, there to learn the abject lessons which the service
of a capricious woman and the bribes of her courtiers do so readily
teach to a grasping nature, now fell a ready slave to the insidious
suggestions of these perjurers. Pye at first had listened with half an
ear. His thoughts were still centred on vengeance and on his own aches
and pains, and the denunciations against Papists which was the chief
subject of discussion between Oates and his audience seemed to him of
puerile significance.

But the eye of the other, of him with the florid complexion, was
constantly fixed on Daniel Pye. Gradually he drew the latter into
conversation. A vague question here, a suggestion there, and the whole
history of that day's bitter wrongs was soon poured into overwilling
ears: the accusation of theft, the whipping post, the pillory.

Pye felt no shame in retailing these humiliating woes to a stranger.
Ever since he had been kicked out of the house by that insolent
subordinate he had longed to tell the tale to some one. Truly he would
have gone raving mad with compressed rage if he had had to go silently
to bed. The stranger was a sympathetic listener:

"Strike me! but 'tis a damnable tale," he said, "misdeeds that cry
loudly for revenge. Cannot you, friend, be even with a woman who hath
treated you so ill?"

"How can I?" growled Pye, moodily. "A woman! She is rich, too, and hath
many friends--"

"Well-favoured, too, mayhap," suggested the other.

"Ay, she's counted pretty--"

"And her friends are mostly gentlemen, I imagine."

"Mostly," replied Daniel impatiently, for he liked not this digression
from the all-absorbing topic of his own woes.

Tongue said nothing more for the present, but anon he called for mulled
ale, and made Pye draw nearer to the table and partake largely of his
lavishness.

The ale had been strengthened with raw alcohol, and made heady with
steaming and the admixture of spices. It had special properties--as
all blackguards in search of victims or confederates well knew--of
loosening tongues and addling feeble minds.

Daniel Pye had had no desire to be reticent. He was already over-ready
to talk. But the spirituous ale which soon got into his head killed
that instinctive native suspicion in him, which in more sober moments
would have caused him to look askance at the easy familiarity of his
newly-found friend.

Pye was quite unaware of the fact that Tongue was really questioning
him very closely, and that he himself gave ready answer to every
question. Within half an hour, he had told the other all that there
was to know about Mistress Peyton and her household, but still Master
Tongue was disappointing in his offers of advice. Daniel was under
the impression that the man with the florid face would help him to be
revenged on his spiteful mistress, and yet time went on and Daniel had
told his story over and over again in every detail and yet nothing had
been suggested that sounded satisfactory.

He wanted to dwell on his troubles, those final ten lashes specially
ordered, the rotten eggs thrown at him one by one by that damnable
little scullion whom he himself had so often thrashed. Yet Master
Tongue would no longer dwell on these interesting facts, but always
dragged the conversation back to Mistress Peyton's household, or to the
gentlemen who formed her court.

"Surely, friend," he said somewhat impatiently at last, "you must have
known some of these gentlemen quite intimately. If as you say your
mistress was a noted beauty, she must have had many admirers, some more
favoured than others--some of these must have been Papists. The Duke of
Norfolk now--did he come to see your lady?"

"No," replied Daniel Pye, sulkily. "But just as that rascally scullion
hit me in the eye--"

"Never mind about that now," interrupted the other. "Try and tell me
the names of those gentlemen who most often visited this Mistress Julia
Peyton."

"There was Sir John Ayloffe--"

"He is no Papist--who else?"

"Sir Anthony Wykeham--"

"Oh!" said Tongue eagerly. "Did he come often?"

"No. Only once. But as I was telling you, there was a youngster in that
crowd--"

But the other again broke in impatiently:

"You only saw Sir Anthony Wykeham once? When was that?"

"He came with my lord of Stowmaries."

"My lord Stowmaries? You know my lord Stowmaries? Did he come often?"

"Every day nearly. Mistress Peyton is like to marry him, now that he's
rid of his first wife."

To Daniel Pye's utter astonishment, this simple fact--which he himself
considered of very minor interest in comparison with the story of his
own troubles--seemed to delight his newly-found friend.

Master Tongue jumped up with every sign of eager excitement.

"You knew my lord Stowmaries?" he reiterated insistently. "You knew him
well?"

Then as Pye, somewhat bewildered, assented, he ejaculated:

"By G--d! the best man we could ever have hit upon, under the
circumstances."

He now slipped his hand confidentially under Pye's arm, forcing him
to rise, then he dragged him away from the group, and into a distant
corner of the room.

"Friend," he whispered eagerly, "let me tell you that you are in luck
to-day. You want your revenge; you shall have it, and much more yet
to boot, and your spiteful mistress will yet have cause to rue the day
when she turned you out of doors. Listen to me, man! Are you desirous
of securing a good competence as well as of being even with her who had
you whipped and pilloried?"

"Ay!" replied Daniel Pye with a fervour which was too deep for a longer
flow of words.

"Then do you go out of here now and find means to kill time in some
other tavern close by. But at ten of the clock this night return here.
You will find me and my friend Oates, and one or two more of these
gentlemen who have a vast scheme in hand for our own good fortune,
wherein we will ask you to participate. Nay, ask me no more now!" added
the man with the bleary eyes. "It were too long to explain, and there
are several pairs of ears present in this room at this moment who are
not meant to hear all that I say. But I tell you, friend, that if you
be willing, my friend Oates will help you to your revenge, and in
addition there will be at least £30 in your pocket, and the chance of
earning more. Well, what say you?"

"That I'll come," said Daniel Pye simply.




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                      Love's wings are overfleet
                      And like the panther's feet
                      The feet of Love.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


When Mistress Peyton had finally dismissed Daniel Pye from her service,
after having seen him flogged and pilloried, she felt somewhat more at
ease.

She did not see his gesture of menace, nor would it have perturbed her
much if she had. Her spite against the man had been cruel and petty;
she knew that well enough, yet did not strive to curb it. Daniel Pye's
howls at the whipping post had momentarily served to alleviate the
anxieties which as day succeeded day grew in intensity.

The recollection of what she had made the man suffer was a solace, even
now when the awful truth had begun to dawn upon her that in striving to
gain too much, she had very likely lost all.

Rumour was overbusy with Michael Kestyon; his popularity with the
king, my lord Shaftesbury's interest in the long-forgotten peerage
claim, Michael's long conferences with Sir William Jones, the
Attorney-General, who was said to know more about peerages, genealogies
and legitimacies than did His Majesty's heralds and poursuivants
themselves.

On Sir William's report would the king ultimately base his decision
as to Michael Kestyon's claim to the title and estates of Stowmaries
and Rivaulx. The matter would not be referred to the Lord's House of
Parliament. It was absolutely one for the Crown to decide, nor were
the noble lords like to go against the king's mandate.

Already gossips averred that Michael had paid the Attorney-General one
hundred thousand pounds for the report which was ready to be submitted
to the king, and which, needless to say, was entirely in favour of
the claim. It was also said that my lord Stowmaries--financially
somewhat straitened for the moment, through a recent highly-interesting
adventure--was unable to cap his cousin's munificent gift to Sir
William Jones by one more magnificent still.

All these rumours were quite sufficient forsooth to cause the fair
Julia many an anxious hour and many a sleepless night. Small wonder
that when she thought of Daniel Pye and of that hundred thousand pounds
paid to the Attorney-General, which could not have been forthcoming
if the miserable reprobate had delivered his mistress' letter to M.
Legros in good time, no wonder, then, I say, that her small teeth,
sharp as those of a wildcat, set against each other in an agony of
impotent rage. She would have liked to have got hold of her serving-man
again, to have had him flogged again and again, ay, and to have had him
deprived of his right hand for his disobedience and his lies.

The "might-have-beens" were becoming positive torture to the beautiful
Julia; and my lord Stowmaries had not yet come home. He had gone
to Rome for the dispensation, which he told her in an ardent and
passionate missive, he had at last obtained. Julia laughed, a cruel,
callous, bitter laugh when she read that letter. Of a truth the man
must be mad who could for a moment think that she would wed him in
poverty and obscurity, just as readily as she would in riches.

Cousin John did his best to console her. He vowed that rumour lied,
that Michael was spending his money in a vain endeavour to retain his
popularity with the king, in which he was rapidly failing, and that
no sensible-minded person did believe that His Majesty would uphold
the preposterous claims of a sworn adventurer, wastrel and soldier of
fortune, against so elegant a gentleman as was my lord of Stowmaries.

After one of these visits from Cousin John, Mistress Julia always felt
temporarily relieved of her anxiety. She had thought it best for the
moment to keep aloof from the society of London; she was nowhere to
be seen in public, not even at the playhouses where she had once been
the cynosure of all eyes. She wanted to see her future fully assured
before she again encountered the admiring glances of the men, or the
oft ill-natured comments of the women.

When at last Lord Stowmaries, back from his journey to Rome, was
once more at her feet, glowing with loving ardour, triumphant in his
success, Mistress Peyton remained cold and unresponsive. He did not
notice this, for he was full of projects and happy that the path which
led him to her arms had at last been made quite clear.

"Madly as I longed for your sweet presence, my best beloved," he said
whilst he covered her little hands with kisses, "I would not return
until I knew that I was free--quite free to place mine all, my name,
my fortune at your feet. I journeyed to Rome, dear heart, immediately
after the esclandre in Paris. I paid Michael his due, then flew to His
Holiness. When I returned homewards I was eager to know how the scandal
had spread. Nay, there is no fear now that the tailor will strive to
interfere with me. There are various rumours current about the wench,
one of them being that she will go to a nunnery, the other, which
gains far more credence, being that King Louis, vastly interested
in her adventure hath cast eyes of admiration on her and that Mme.
de Montespan is deadly jealous. Be that as it may, Monseigneur the
Archbishop of Paris is now wholly on my side. He gave me letters to His
Holiness, whom I saw in Rome."

"And what said His Holiness, the Pope?" queried Julia, feigning
eagerness which she was far from feeling.

"He has granted me religious dispensation to contract a fresh marriage,
provided the courts of England do dissolve my present bonds, which is a
foregone conclusion," said the young man triumphantly. "My man of law
tells me that it will be but a matter of a few weeks, and that the case
will be decided as soon as heard, provided the tailor's wench doth not
defend it, which under the circumstances she is not like to do. I am
free, dear heart, free to marry you as soon as you will consent."

Then, as she did not reply, he added reproachfully:

"You are silent, my Julia; will you not tell me that you are glad?"

She made no effort to smile.

"Indeed, my lord, I am glad," she said calmly, "but I would not have
you hasten matters too much."

"Why not? To me every day, every hour that separates me from you, seems
like weary cycles of dull and deadly years. Methinks that if you would
but allow me to proclaim you to the whole world as my future countess,
I could wait more patiently then."

"Not yet, my lord, not yet," she said with a slight show of petulance.

"Why not?" he urged.

"The times are troublous for your co-religionists, my lord," she said
vaguely.

"Bah! the troubles will not last, and they do not affect me."

"Are you quite sure of that, my lord? One by one the Papists in the
kingdom fall under the ban of public hatred."

"We are much maligned, but the king is on our side," interposed
Stowmaries with an indifferent shrug of the shoulders.

"Mayhap, mayhap," she rejoined impatiently. "But nevertheless, the
Papists are in bad odour. There is talk that the Duke of York will soon
be sent abroad. The outcry in London is loud against what is called a
Papist intrigue to sell England to France and to place her people under
the yoke of Rome."

"What hath all that to do with our love, dear heart?"

"Everything," she said, angry with him for being so obtuse, not liking
yet to show him her hand, the cruel hand which would dismiss him
without compunction, were his fortunes on the wane. "You forget that
by disgracing the tailor's wench, you have made Michael Kestyon, the
claimant to your title, passing rich."

"Bah! He hath spent half that substance already, so 'tis said. The king
soon tires of his friends, and his affections are an expensive luxury
to keep."

"Rumour goes on to say that Michael Kestyon hath paid the
Attorney-General one hundred thousand pounds that he may send a
favourable report of his case to the king," asserted Mistress Peyton,
relentlessly, almost spitefully.

Lord Stowmaries made no direct reply. Truth to tell, he thought his
fair Julia's anxieties futile, but at the same time, with unvarying
optimism and self-sufficiency, he had attributed these anxieties on his
behalf to her great love for him. Everything so far had gone well with
him; for years now his every wish in life had been gratified; even the
child-marriage, that great obstacle to the desires of his heart, had
been swept away from before his path, leaving it clear and broad, to
lead him straight to gratification and to happiness.

With characteristic vanity he would not see that Julia, who had been
all eagerness and ardour awhile ago, had suddenly become cold and
well-nigh hostile. In every word which she uttered, in every inflection
of her voice--even when it became petulant and spiteful--he heard but
the echo of the overmastering emotions of a tender heart, whose sole
object, himself, was in imaginary peril.

He loved her all the better for her fears, though he felt none himself.
He knew quite well that a wave of fanatical hatred against the Roman
Catholics was passing over Puritan England; that the nation tired of a
king's treachery had turned in deadly bitterness against those whom it
held responsible for the constitutional faithlessness of a Stuart.

But Titus Oates had not yet come forward with his lies, and Lord
Stowmaries and his co-religionists were the last to foresee that
the abject terror and malignant intolerance of the whole nation
were already being directed against them, and that these would anon
culminate in those shameful accusations, mock trials and scandalous
verdicts which have remained to this day a dark and ineradicable blot
on England's integrity and on her sense of justice.

We must not suppose for a moment that Mistress Peyton foresaw the ugly
black cloud which was looming on the not very distant horizon. Her
intuition in political matters only went so far as these affected her
own prospects. But no one who lived in London in this year of grace
could help but see that Papists were held in abhorrence and in fear.
The terms of the treaty of Dover had, despite strenuous efforts on
the part of my lords Clifford and Arlington, become public property.
England, with eyes rendered unseeing by abject fear, saw herself the
minion of France, the slave of the Papacy. It only needed the tiny
spark to kindle these smouldering ashes into raging flames.

Mistress Peyton, keenly alive to her own interests, did not wish to tie
her future irrevocably to a man who within the next few months might
find himself divested of title and wealth and mayhap in the dock for
treason. Therefore, all Stowmaries' ardent entreaties received but
little response.

"There is time and to spare," was all the hope which the fair beauty
chose to give to her adorer; "as you say, this wave of anti-Romanism
will pass away; Michael Kestyon will dissipate his newly-acquired
wealth in riotous living; then you, my lord, will be free to think
once more of marriage. I' faith the bonds are scarce broken yet; your
nullity suit, my lord, hath not even been tried; the tailor may prove
more obstinate than you think, and give you trouble yet. On my soul,
'twill be better to wait till all anxiety is removed from you, until
Michael Kestyon is sunk back in obscurity and the tailor's baggage hid
in a nunnery. Then, my lord, you may claim my promise--but not before."

My lord of Stowmaries had perforce to be satisfied for the present,
though he chafed under this further period of incertitude. But the
fair Julia would grant him no more for the present, although after her
cold declaration that she herself would not be tied by a promise, she
did exact from him a holy and solemn pledge that he considered himself
bound to her irrevocably and whatever might betide, so help him God.




                             CHAPTER XXXII

          They said that love would die when Hope was gone
          And Love mourned long, and sorrowed after Hope;
          At last she sought out Memory and they trod
          The same old paths where Love had walked with Hope,
          And Memory fed the soul of Love with tears.
                                                      --TENNYSON.


M. Legros walked out backwards from the august presence of Monseigneur
the Archbishop of Paris with head reverently bent to receive the
benediction not altogether ungraciously given.

Through the close ranks of gorgeously attired, liveried servants he
passed, then across the courtyard and through the gilded gates out into
the street.

Then only would his sense of what was due to Monseigneur allow him to
give vent to his feelings. He sighed and shook his head and muttered
vague words of despondency.

Of a truth how different had been this interview to-day to that other
one a brief while ago, when with light elastic step, good M. Legros had
left Monseigneur's presence with his heart full of elation, of triumph
and of hope.

It had been November then; the kindly tailor remembered how cold had
been the night, with that penetrating drizzle which sought out the very
marrow of the unfortunate pedestrian who happened to be abroad. But M.
Legros had not heeded the cold or the wet then, his heart had been warm
with the joyful news which he was about to bring into his home. Now
the warm glow of a late September sun was in the air; not far away in
the gardens of the Queen Mother's palace the last roses of summer were
throwing their dying fragrance into the air even as far as the dismal
streets which Legros traversed, oh, with such a heavy heart!

Indeed, he paid no heed to the scent of the flowers, the last tender
calls of thrush and blackbird which came from the heavy bouquets of
the Luxembourg, and he almost shivered despite the warmth of this late
summer's afternoon. Monseigneur had not been encouraging; and even the
tailor's philosophical temperament had shown signs of inward rebellion
at the cold manner in which the Archbishop had received his just
plaint. Wherein had he sinned, either he or his wife? They had been
deceived, nothing more. Would not any one else have been deceived in
just the same way, by the soft words and grand manner of that splendid
blackguard?

And Rose Marie, the innocent lamb? Was it not a sin in itself even to
suggest that she had been to blame? Yet Monseigneur would not listen,
despite good M. Legros' entreaties. "You should have guarded your
daughter's honour more carefully," His Greatness had said very severely.

Prayers for help had been of no avail.

"I cannot help you now," Monseigneur had reiterated with marked
impatience; "the matter rests with your daughter's husband. My lord of
Stowmaries is the gravely-injured husband; he may choose to forgive
and forget, he may take his erring wife back to his heart and home,
but I cannot interfere; the Holy Church would not enforce her decree
under such circumstances. It would be cruel and unjust. If the law of
England will grant the suit of nullity, the Holy Father will not--nay,
he cannot, object. My lord of Stowmaries hath the right to his freedom
now, an he choose."

"But my child is as pure and as innocent as the Holy Virgin herself,"
M. Legros had protested with all the strength of his poor broken heart;
"will not the Church protect the innocent, rather than the guilty? My
lord of Stowmaries himself was a party to the infamous trick which--"

"Into this discussion I cannot enter with you, sirrah!" His Greatness
had interrupted with overwhelming severity. "The matter is one which
doth not concern the Church. What doth concern her is that my lord of
Stowmaries, who is a devout Catholic, hath asked for leave to appeal to
the civil courts of his country for a dissolution of his marriage with
a woman who no longer bears a spotless reputation. This leave under the
unfortunate circumstances and the undoubted publicity of the scandal
around your daughter's fame, the Holy Father hath decided to grant. I
can do nothing in the matter."

"Your Greatness, knowing the real facts of the case--" hazarded the
timid man rendered bold by the excess of his sorrow.

"I only know the facts of the case, such as I see them," interrupted
the Archbishop haughtily, "but since you are so sure of your daughter's
innocence, go and persuade my lord of Stowmaries to view it in the
same light as you do. Transcendent virtue," added Monseigneur, with a
scarce perceptible curl of his thin lips, "is sure to triumph over base
calumny. I promise you that I will do nothing to fan the flames of my
lord's wrath. My attitude will be strictly neutral. Go, seek out Lord
Stowmaries. Let your daughter make a personal appeal. My blessing go
with you."

M. Legros was dismissed. It had been worse than useless now to try and
force a prolongation of the interview. Monseigneur's indifference might
turn at any moment to active opposition. The tailor had made discreet
if lavish offers of money--alms or endowments; he would have given
his entire fortune to see Rose Marie righted. But either my lord of
Stowmaries had forestalled him, or the matter had become one of graver
moment beyond the powers of bribery; certain it is that Monseigneur had
paid no heed to vague suggestions and had severely repressed any more
decided offers.

No wonder, therefore, that despair lay like a heavy weight on the
worthy tailor's heart, as he made his way slowly along the muddy bank
of the river, crossed the Pont Neuf and finally turned in the direction
of the Rue de l'Ancienne Comédie.

Now as then, a girlish hand opened the door for him, in response to
his knock; now as then a pair of confiding arms were thrown around his
neck. But it was a sigh which escaped his throat, and to the sigh there
was no response from those girlish lips turned grave in sorrow.

Maman, with unvarying optimism, insisted on hearing a full account of
the interview with Monseigneur; she weighed every sentence which was
faithfully reported to her, queried indefatigably and commented with
somewhat forced cheerfulness on what she heard.

Rose Marie sat--silent and absorbed--at her father's knee. She had
never harboured any hopes from this long-projected audience; the result
therefore in no way disappointed her.

Not even maman knew what went on in the girl's thoughts, nor how
complete and sudden had been the transformation from the child into
the woman. Rose Marie, when she returned home with her father on
that never-to-be-forgotten night in April, had gone to bed tired and
submissive. When she rose the next morning at her accustomed hour she
took up the threads of her former uneventful life, just as if they had
never been snapped by that strong and treacherous hand.

She studied her music, and delved deeply into her books, she read aloud
to her father out of holy books, and oft sang to him whilst playing
on the harpsichord. M. and Mme. Legros oft wondered exactly how much
she felt; for they loved her far too dearly to be deceived by these
attempts at indifference.

Something of Rose Marie's girlishness had gone from her, never again to
return, something of the bird-like quality of her voice, something of
the deer-like spring of her step. The blue eyes were as clear as ever,
the mouth as perfectly curved, but across the brow lay--all unseen save
to doting eyes--the ineradicable impress of a bitter sorrow.

But the child never spoke of those three weeks that were past, nor was
Michael's name ever mentioned within the walls of the old house in the
Rue de l'Ancienne Comédie. "Milor" had come and stolen the girl's heart
and happiness, wrecked the brightness of a home, and sown disgrace and
shame. And yet to all these three people who should so ardently have
hated him, his name seemed to have become through the intensity of that
grief which he had caused, almost sacred in the magnitude of his sin.

It was as, when to a fanatic, the name of Lucifer becomes as
unspeakable as that of God.

The news that the real lord of Stowmaries had appealed to His
Holiness for leave to contract a fresh marriage had not been long in
reaching the tailor's house. For the past five months now M. Legros
had exhausted every means of persuasion and of bribery to obtain an
audience of Monseigneur.

The Archbishop had been overbusy with grave affairs of state,
so the wretched man was invariably told whenever he tried--most
respectfully--to press his claim for an early audience. It was only
after the terrible news which came direct from Rome that at last
Monseigneur consented to see the stricken father.

Now that interview was over--on which so many feeble hopes had of a
truth been built--His Greatness had been haughty and severe, and the
only consolation which he had deigned to offer was advice which was
indeed very hard to follow.

At the first suggestion, somewhat hesitatingly put forward by Papa
Legros to his daughter, she rose up in revolt.

"Make appeal to my lord Stowmaries?" she said indignantly. "Never. How
could Monseigneur suggest such a course?"

Papa was silent, and even maman sighed and shook her head. Rose Marie
had gone to the window, and her cheeks aflame now, she was staring out
into the street.

"Are we beggars," she murmured, proudly defiant, "that we should be
bidden to sue for grace?"

From where she sat, could her vision but have pierced through the
forest of houses, and thence through the sunlit distance, she might
have beheld the forest of Cluny, and that silent pool whereon the water
lilies reared their stately heads. Here she had sat, just by this same
window, when with bitter words--cruel in that irresistible appeal which
they made to her heart--he had told her about that pool, the lilies
stained with mud, the slimy weeds that spread and girt the graceful
stems, the ineradicable smirch of contact with the infamies of this
world.

Even now his captivating voice seemed to ring in her ears. The blaze of
wrath fled from her cheeks, and the terrible, awful pain gripped her
heart which she knew would never find solace whilst she lived.

At the other end of the room her parents were conversing on the
ever-present topic.

Maman's hitherto indomitable optimism was at last giving way. She
had held up bravely throughout these five weary months of waiting,
hoping--almost against hope, sometimes--that everything would come
right in one audience with Monseigneur.

With unvarying confidence she waited for the summons for Papa Legros
to appear before His Greatness; once the Archbishop heard the truth he
would soon put the matter to rights, and His Holiness himself would see
that the child was righted in the end.

But now the long-looked-for audience had taken place, and it was no
longer any use to disguise the fact that the last glimmer of hope had
flickered out behind the gilded gates of Monseigneur's palace.

Maman, too, had felt indignant when first she heard the Archbishop's
callous advice to Papa Legros. Her mother's heart rebelled at the very
thought of seeing her child a suppliant; she would not add fuel to the
flames of outraged pride by showing what she thought on the matter, but
when Rose Marie rose in revolt with the indignant outcry of "Are we
beggars?" she, the mother, quietly went up to her stewpot and kept her
own counsels to herself, the while she stirred the soup.

Anon when the first wave of angry rebellion had subsided, when Rose
Marie sat quiescent by the open window, Maman Legros put down her
wooden spoon and went up to her husband, putting her heavy, rough hand
on his shoulder, with a motherly gesture of supreme consolation.

"Perhaps Monseigneur is right, Armand," she said with her own
indomitable philosophy; "why not make appeal to Lord Stowmaries, he may
not be a bad man after all."

"You have heard what the child said, Mélanie," replied M. Legros sadly.
"Are we beggars that we should be bidden to sue?"

A great sob rose in Rose Marie's throat. It was the sorrow, the
humiliation of these two dearly-loved folk that was so terrible to
bear. They had been stricken in what they held most dear, in their
integrity and in their child. Self-reproach, too, played no small part
in their grief, and they had not even a memory on which to dwell.

She--Rose Marie--had had her glorious three weeks of perfect happiness,
before she had known that the man she loved was a liar and a cheat.

For the sake of those few brief days of unalloyed joy, because of the
memory of that unclouded happiness, she had endured such an intensity
of pain, that at times she felt--nay! hoped that death or madness
would end the agony. But she had been happy! Remembrance brought an
overwhelming shame, but she had been happy!

Sometimes she thought that her whole soul must have become perverted,
her sense of virtue warped, for bitter as was the pain of it all, she
dwelt oft and oft in her mind on those three exquisite weeks of perfect
happiness.

Her heart, starved and aching, now lived on that memory. Her ears
seemed to catch again the timbre of his voice vibrating with passion,
her eyes rendered dull and heavy with all the unshed tears, seemed, in
closing, to see him there, standing near her with his arms held ready
to enfold her, and that burning, ardent look in his dark eyes which
had shown her visions of an earthly heaven, such as she had never
dreamed before.

Was it wicked to dwell on it all? Sinful, mayhap!--and surely not
chaste, for he had lied to her when he said--

And then an insidious spirit voice would interrupt this train of
thought and whisper in her ear: "No, he did not lie when he said that
he loved thee, Rose Marie!" and the girl--just a suffering woman
now--would in response feel such an agonizing sense of pain that she
cried to God--to the blessed, suffering Lord--to take her away out of
this unbearable misery.

But they--the dear old folk--had no such bitter-sweet memories on
which to dwell, nothing but blank, dull sorrow, with no longer now any
hope of seeing the load lifted. It would grow heavier and heavier as
the years went by. Rose Marie had noticed that the streaks of grey on
maman's smooth hair had become more marked of late, and Papa Legros
seldom rose from a chair now without leaning heavily on his stick, with
one hand, and on the arm of the chair with the other.

Yet maman still strove to be cheerful, even now she said with that new
touch of philosophy in her which seemed to have taken the place of her
former optimism:

"Ah, well, Armand! if the child will not go, we cannot force her,
poor lamb! but 'tis not saying that we are beggars and I cannot help
thinking that Monseigneur may be right in his advice after all."

Then as Papa Legros sighed and shook his head, staring in mute
depression straight out before him, Rose Marie rose from the window
seat and came close to where her parents sat. Kneeling beside the kind
father, whose every sigh cut into her heart, looking up at those
streaks of grey in her mother's smooth hair, she said simply:

"We are beggars, Father, Mother dear, beggared of happiness, of joy, of
pride. Father, we'll to England when you will. We'll seek out my lord
of Stowmaries and make appeal to him, that he may restore to us that
which in wantonness he hath taken away."

"The child is right, Armand," said maman, and like a true phoenix from
out the flames, her optimism rose triumphant:

"I do verily believe," she said cheerfully, the while she
surreptitiously wiped her eyes with the corner of her apron, "I do
verily believe that the young man when he sees our Rose Marie will
repent him of his folly and will be joyful to take her to his heart."




                            CHAPTER XXXIII

          Brute worshippers or wielders of the rod
          Most murderous even of all that call thee God!
          Most treacherous even of all that called thee Lord!
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


No one--not even her parents--knew what the proposed journey cost
the girl in bitter sense of shame. She had, in order to consent to
this pilgrimage of humiliation, to put aside all thoughts of her
own feelings in the matter. She as a sentient, thinking, suffering
woman must for awhile cease to be; her individuality must sink into
nothingness, her pride, alas, must be broken on the wheel of her filial
affection, crushed out of all desire for rebellion.

If the dear folk thought that a personal appeal to Lord Stowmaries was
a possible loophole out of the present abyss of sorrow and disgrace,
then she--Rose Marie--would lend herself to that appeal: and that not
as a martyr, a saint going to the rack, but as readily, as cheerfully,
as if the meeting with the man who had despised and discarded her, who
had sold her to another man, as if seeing him face to face was at least
a matter of indifference to her.

Once having made up her mind to the sacrifice, Rose Marie would not
allow herself to think of it. She set to her little preparations for
the journey with well-feigned eagerness. Even maman was at times
deceived, for the child would sing whilst she put a few stitches to the
clothes which she was to take away.

Only when she was quite alone, or lying awake in the narrow little bed
in the wall, would that sinful and rebellious pride rise up in arms,
and Rose Marie would almost have to cling to the woodwork of her bed
lest she found herself jumping up and rushing to her parents with a
frantic cry of revolt: "I cannot go! I cannot do it!"

One word of protest from her even at this eleventh hour, and the
journey would have been abandoned. But she made no protest, and the day
for the voyage was fixed.

It was some two or three days before the projected departure that M.
Legros, going down at his accustomed hour, to see the last of his
'prentices and cutters ere they left the workshop, found that two
strangers were waiting to speak with him.

One of them was not altogether a stranger, for Papa Legros
looking--with the keen eyes of a successful business man--on the
unkempt and slouchy figure that stood expectantly in the doorway soon
made up his mind that he had seen the face before. A second look
decided the point, and brought back with a sharp pang the bitter memory
of that gay wedding festivity which the advent of this same stranger,
then the bearer of a fateful letter, had so rudely interrupted.

Daniel Pye and his companion, a meek-faced young man who looked like
a scholar very much out at elbows, were kept humbly standing in the
doorway, the while the 'prentices filed out past them, on the close of
the working-day. We may assume that these rowdy youngsters did not make
the two men's halt there any too pleasant for them. But Pye had learnt
patience in the past two months, ever since he had ceased to be the
dreaded majordomo in a pretty woman's household. He did not understand
the gibes aimed at him by the impertinent crowd, and the pin-pricks,
covert pinches and other physical inconveniences to which he was
subjected left him passably indifferent.

As for the young student who accompanied him, he certainly looked well
accustomed to buffetings from whatever quarter these might descend upon
him.

The two men stood stolidly still, twirling their soft felt hats in
their hands, never moving from the spot where they had been told to
wait until such time as Maitre Legros might condescend to speak with
them. Maitre Legros for the nonce was engaged in counting out his
'prentices as they filed past him and then out by the door, lest one
of them bent on nocturnal mischief remained behind in safe concealment
until time was ripe for pranks. After the 'prentices, the cutters and
fitters filed out--more soberly for they were older men, but every man
as he passed threw a curious look at the visitors, more especially at
the shaggy, grimy face of Daniel Pye.

When the last of the crowd of workers had passed out into the street,
Papa Legros turned to his foreman cutter, who had introduced the
strangers into the shop.

"What do these men want?" he asked. "Have they told you their business,
Master Duval?"

"No, M'sieu," replied the foreman, "one of them does not understand
French, the other one only seems to be here as interpreter. The one
with the shaggy beard is the principal, he asked for M. Legros with
great insistence and as he has been here before--"

"Ah!--You do recognize him then?"

"I have seen his face before, M'sieu--I'd take my oath on that--though
when that was I could not say."

"Bien, my good Duval, I'll speak to the stranger anon," rejoined M.
Legros. "I shall not require you any more to-day. You may go now. I'll
lock the back doors."

Whilst Duval obeyed, Legros studied the face of his visitor very
attentively. He had no doubt in his mind that this was the same man who
had brought him that fateful letter on Rose Marie's wedding day, just
an hour after the child had gone away with that cruel and treacherous
blackguard. Undoubtedly the face was very much altered; it had been
trim and clean-shaved before, now an unkempt beard hid the mouth
and jaw. The eyes, too, looked more sunken, the nose and forehead
more pinched, and a shifty, furtive expression replaced the former
obsequious manner peculiar to the well-drilled lacquey.

Obviously this man was the principal in this new affair, and at a curt
word from M. Legros he came forward into the room with a certain air of
sulky defiance, the while his companion followed meekly in the rear.

Papa Legros would have not owned to it for worlds, but as a matter of
fact his heart was throbbing with anxiety. Instinctively he looked
on the shaggy figure of Daniel Pye as on a bird of ill-omen. It was
through the agency of those same grimy hands that the first terrible
blow of a crushing misfortune had fallen on the tailor and his family.
What other misery would this unwelcome visitor bring in his train?

"You have business with me, my masters?" asked M. Legros at last. He
settled himself down resolutely in the high-backed chair, which he
always used when talking to his inferiors--but he left the two men
standing before him; there were no other chairs in the room.

Daniel Pye had grunted a surly assent.

"And of what nature is that business?" continued M. Legros, keeping up
an air of haughty indifference.

"It is of a private nature, Master," here interposed the younger of
the two men. He was evidently impressed by the great tailor's august
condescension and spoke timidly with a slight impediment in his speech.

"Then you may speak of it freely," said M. Legros. "No one can overhear
you. All my men have gone. So I pray you be brief. My time is much
occupied, and I have none to waste."

The young student no doubt would have hemmed and hawed very
hesitatingly for some little while to come. But Daniel Pye, moody and
impatient, gave him a vigorous nudge in the ribs.

"Go it, Master Clerk," he said gruffly in English. "By G--d, man, I
am not paying you to toady to this old fool, but to state my business
clearly before him. Let me tell you that that business will be highly
welcomed in this house, so there is no cause for this damnable shaking
of your body, as if you were afraid."

"What does your friend say to you, sirrah?" asked the tailor
peremptorily, for he did not like this conversation carried on in a
language which he did not understand.

"He says, my Master," replied the clerk, "that I must speak up boldly,
for his business will be pleasing to your graciousness. I am but the
poor, ill-paid interpreter, who--"

"Then I pray you interpret both boldly and briefly," interposed M.
Legros impatiently. "What is your friend's business? Out with it,
quick, before I have you both kicked out of this door."

The clerk did not think it necessary to translate the tailor's last
words into English.

"The business concerns my lord the Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx," he
began.

"Then 'tis none of mine," retorted the tailor coldly.

"Ay, but of a truth it is, good Master," rejoined the other more
boldly, "and my friend here, Master Daniel Pye, by name, a worthy and
independent Englishman, hath journeyed all the way from London to speak
with you on this business. The noble Earl of Stowmaries hath greatly
wronged you, sir, and your family. You have suffered great humiliation
at his hands. Your daughter through his neglect is neither wife nor
maid--"

"And you, sirrah, will be neither alive nor dead, but near to both
estates, an you do not hold your tongue," said M. Legros bringing an
angry fist crashing down on the arm of his chair. "Out of my house this
instant!--How dare you speak my daughter's name without my leave, you
dirty paper-scraper, you bundle of quill feathers, you--"

Good M. Legros was choking with wrath but he did fully intend to put
his threat into execution and to kick these two impertinent rascals out
of his house. Ere he could recover himself, however, the clerk forcibly
egged on by Daniel Pye had interposed quietly but firmly:

"Nevertheless, sir, it is my duty to be the mouthpiece of my friend who
hath come all this way to tell you that God himself hath taken up your
cause against the great and noble Earl of Stowmaries, whose pride will
soon be laid in the dust, who will become an abject, cringing creature,
dependent mayhap on your bounty for subsistence, dispossessed,
disinherited, nay worse, tried for treason, and hanged, sir, hanged as
a traitor! Is not that a glorious revenge, sir, for the wrongs which he
has done to you?"

"Nay, and by the Mass, sirrah," said M. Legros who had recovered
sufficiently from his blind wrath to be justly indignant at this
mealy-mouthed harangue, "if you do, value your shoulders and if your
friend cares for his skin, you can have thirty seconds wherein to reach
that door, after which the toe of my boot and the stout stick in
yonder corner shall accelerate your footsteps."

"Sir," protested the clerk, prompted thereto by Daniel Pye, "my friend
here desires to remind you that he was driven away by blows from your
doors in this like manner just five months ago. Had you given him
more ready access to your august person, the letter which he bore and
which was written by my hand at a kind lady's bidding, would have been
delivered into your hands one hour the earlier, and thus would have
averted a misery which you yourself would now give your life's blood to
undo."

The words were well chosen. The Huguenot clerk had interpreted Daniel
Pye's promptings in a manner which could not fail to bear impress on
Master Legros' mind. The shaft had been well aimed. It had struck a
vital nerve centre. The tailor, feeling the justice of the reproof,
curbed his wrath. He was silent for a moment or two, while the two men
watched and waited.

Suddenly the touch of a hand which he loved, roused Master Legros from
his moody incertitude and a girl's voice said with firm decision:

"These men are right in what they say, Father. There is no harm in
hearing what they have to say. If they bring lying news or empty
scandal 'twill be ample time then to turn them out of doors."

"You have not heard all their impertinent canting harangues, my jewel."

"I heard enough to understand that these men have come here to tell you
of some evil which is about to descend on my lord of Stowmaries, my
husband before God. That is so, is it not?"

And she turned great inquiring eyes on Daniel Pye and on the clerk.

"That is so, Mademoiselle."

"My mother and I heard my father's voice raised in anger against you.
She bade me come down to see what was amiss. The matter which concerns
my lord of Stowmaries also concerns me, so I pray you tell my father
all about it in my presence, and have no fear of his wrath, for he will
listen to you for my sake."

"Then, sirrah, an my daughter desires it, I pray you tell your story!"
rejoined Legros. "But do so briefly; I'll patiently hear of the evil
which hath befallen my lord Stowmaries, but will not listen to any
impertinent comments on his actions past or in the present."

"Tell them the whole tale just as you did write it out," whispered
Daniel Pye to his interpreter. "Damn you, sir, how much longer will you
be about it!"

"Then hear me, master tailor, for it began this wise," now said the
clerk with a great effort at composure. "My lord of Stowmaries hath a
kinsman, one named Michael Kestyon, whom you know, and on whose conduct
I am not permitted to make comment. Michael hath for years held--on
grounds which it would take too long now to explain--that he and not
his cousin should own the titles and estates of Stowmaries and Rivaulx.
But hitherto he hath had no money wherewith to press his claim. The law
as administered in England is a vastly expensive affair, my master, and
Michael Kestyon was a poor man, poorer even than I; he was a wastrel
and many called him a dissolute reprobate."

"Enough of Michael Kestyon," interrupted Legros gruffly. "Have I not
told you to be brief."

"Michael Kestyon's affairs form part of my tale, Master. You must know
that he is now passing rich. Many and varied are the rumours as to
the provenance of his wealth, and many the comments as to the change
in the man himself. Armed with money Michael Kestyon hath obtained the
ear and attention of the high dignitaries of the law and the favour of
the King himself. The fact hath become of public knowledge that only
His Majesty's signature to a document is needed now to instate Michael
Kestyon in the title and dignities which are declared to be legally
his. My lord of Stowmaries, therefore, is, as you see, no longer
secure in his position and his wealth, and though you may not permit
the humble clerk to make comment on the doings of his betters, yet
Master Daniel Pye hath come all the way from England to bring you this
news, which must be vastly gratifying to you, whom that same lord of
Stowmaries had so wantonly injured."

Daniel Pye and his mouthpiece both looked at the tailor with marked
assurance now. Of a truth they were quite confident that the Legros
thirsting for revenge would receive the news with every sign of
exultation. But the master tailor was silent and moody, and it was
Mademoiselle who spoke.

"And is this all the news which you, sir, came all the way from England
to impart to my father?" she asked, addressing Daniel Pye in his mother
tongue.

"No, not altogether all, Mistress," he replied; "I have better news for
you yet."

"Anent my lord Stowmaries' troubles?"

"Ay, something you will be still more glad to hear."

"What is it?"

"My lord of Stowmaries is a Papist--or--saving your presence he is a
Catholic, and Catholics are in bad odour in England just now--they are
said to be conspiring to murder the King, and to place the Duke of
York on the throne--to sell England to France, and to place the English
people under the yoke of the Pope of Rome."

"Hath my lord of Stowmaries thus conspired?" she asked coldly.

"I think so," replied Daniel Pye.

"How do you mean? That you think so is no proof that he hath done it."

"I can soon bring forward the proofs," said Pye with a knowing leer
directed at her from under his shaggy brows, "if you, Mistress, will
help me."

Rose Marie felt a shudder which was almost one of loathing creeping up
her spine, at sight of the expression in the man's face.

It told such an infamous tale of base thoughts and desires, of cupidity
and of triumphant revenge, that her every nerve rebelled against
further parleyings with such a villain.

But there was something more than mere feminine curiosity in her wish
to know something definite of what was really passing in the mind of
Daniel Pye. That shrewd instinct and sound common sense--which is the
inalienable birthright of the French bourgeoisie--told her that the man
would not have undertaken the arduous and costly journey from England
to France unless he had some powerful motive to prompt him thereunto,
or--what was more likely still--some reward to gain.

The desire to learn the truth of this motive or of this hoped-for gain
remained therefore paramount in her mind, and she did her best not to
give outward expression to her sense of repulsion when Daniel Pye drew
nearer to her in an attempt at confidential familiarity.

He was far from guessing that his last words had done aught but please
this wench and her father, both of whom had as serious a grievance
against Lord Stowmaries as he himself had against Mistress Peyton.

It had not taken the dismissed serving-man very long to learn the
lesson of how he could best be revenged on his past mistress. The
easiest way to hit at the ambitious lady was undoubtedly--as Master
Tongue had pointed out to him--by bringing the man she desired to marry
to humiliation and ruin. Michael Kestyon's successful claim to the
peerage of Stowmaries had paved the way for the more complete undoing
of my lord, and Daniel Pye soon knew the lesson by heart which the
informers of Whitefriars had taught him.

Oates was ready with his lies; he and his confederates had soon
mustered up a goodly array of names of Papist gentlemen against whom
these lies could most easily be proved. The first spark had been set
to the tinder which presently would set the whole of England ablaze
with the hideous flame of persecution. But to make their villainous
perjuries more startling, and at the same time to obtain better
pay for uttering them, they wanted to add to their list a few more
high-sounding names which would have the additional advantage of
proving the far-reaching dimensions of the supposed Popish plot.
Amongst these names that of Stowmaries would be of great moment. Daniel
Pye with his intimate acquaintance with my lord became a valuable
addition to the band.

Soon he was taught to concoct a plausible story; information against
Papists was being richly rewarded already by the terrorised Ministry
and Parliament. But Pye, grafting his own wits onto the lesson given,
bethought himself of the rich tailor over in Paris who surely would
not only help him actively in the telling of his lies, but also pay
him passing well for bringing Lord Stowmaries to humiliation and
disgrace--if not to the gallows.

Tongue--who had remained Daniel Pye's guide and leader in all his
villainies--fully approved of the plan; we may take it that he intended
to levy a percentage on what the more ignorant peasant would obtain
from Master Legros.

It was felt among that vile band of informers that foreign witnesses,
especially those of French nationality, would be a valuable help to the
success of the accusations, and to all these men of low and debased
mind, it seemed quite natural that the tailor--whose daughter had been
the heroine of a public scandal brought about by Lord Stowmaries'
repudiation of her--would out of vengeful malice be only too ready to
swear to any falsehood against the young man.

Thus Daniel Pye went over to France, accompanied by the good wishes of
an infamous crowd. The few pounds which he had saved whilst he was in
Mistress Peyton's service were rapidly dwindling away. The journey to
Paris had been expensive, too, and he had therefore much at stake in
this interview with the tailor, and watched with greedy eyes the face
both of Legros and of his daughter, now that the latter was silent and
that the old man resolutely took no part in the conversation.

Of a truth Legros had been listening moodily to what this uncouth
stranger was saying, trying to comprehend the drift of all his talk.
But the worthy tailor had only a very scanty knowledge of the English
tongue, only so much in fact as enabled him in his business to make
himself understood by the cloth manufacturers and button makers of
England with whom he came in contact. Therefore he had only made vague
guesses as to what Pye was saying to Rose Marie. Once or twice he
tried to interpose, but every time his daughter checked him with a
gesture of firm entreaty, and then a whispered: "_Chéri_, allow me to
speak with him!"

Now after that first instinctive movement of recoil quickly suppressed,
Rose Marie, keen to know what ugly schemes were being nurtured in the
man's brain, feeling, too, that to know might mean the power to avert
or to help, turned with well-assumed cordiality once more to Daniel Pye.

"Meseems, sir," she said, "that you have more to tell me. In what way
can I help to prove that my lord of Stowmaries hath conspired against
the King of England?"

"You need not do much, Mistress," rejoined Pye confidentially. "I will
do most of the work for you. But I am a poor man and--"

"I understand. You want some money. You wish to be paid. For what?"

That sense of repulsion almost overmastered her again. Was she not
lending herself--if only with words and with seeming acquiescence--to
some abominable infamy? Swiftly her thoughts flew back to the pool of
Cluny, the water lilies smirched with the slime. How true had been
those words he spoke: contact with what is depraved, what is mean and
base, soils and humiliates ineradicably very soon.

"You have come to my father to sell him some information against Lord
Stowmaries. Is that it?" she reiterated impatiently as Daniel Pye was
somewhat slow in replying.

"I can bring Lord Stowmaries to the gallows, by just saying the word,"
replied the man. "I thought Master Legros would wish me to say the
word--that he would help a poor man who tried to do him service."

"My lord of Stowmaries is not at the mercy of false accusers," she said
almost involuntarily.

"Papists in England do conspire," retorted Pye phlegmatically, "and I
and my friends know a vast deal of their doings--Hark 'ee, Mistress,"
he added, drawing nearer to her, "and you too, my master, for methinks
you understand something of what I say. It is all as simple and as
clear as daylight. Papists are in very bad odour in England, and the
Ministry and Parliament are all in blue terror lest the country be sold
to France or to Rome. Now my friend Titus Oates and some other equally
honourable gentlemen bethought themselves of a splendid plan whereby
we can all render our own country a great service by exposing these
Papist conspiracies. We are being well paid already for any information
we get, and information is quite easy to obtain. Look at Master Oates!
He hath invented a splendid tale whereby the Duke of York himself and
certainly his secretary--one Coleman--and a number of others do find
themselves in dire trouble. Lord Stowmaries is a Papist, too. I know
him well. You know him passing well. We can readily concoct a famous
story between us, which will vastly please the Privy Council and
Parliament. Lord Stowmaries, I feel sure, would wish to see England
Catholic like himself. He wishes to see the King put away, and the Duke
of York reigning in his stead. Well! all that we need do, good Master
and Mistress, is to write out a statement wherein we all swear that we
overheard my lord of Stowmaries express a desire to that effect, and
the man who did you both so great a wrong, the man, Master, who first
married your daughter and then cast her away from him as if she were
of evil fame, will dangle on the gallows to your satisfaction and to
mine."

Daniel Pye paused, viewing his two interlocutors with a glance of
triumph. He had absolutely no doubt in his mind that the rich tailor
would within the next second or two--as soon, in fact, as he had
recovered from the first shock of pleasant surprise, jump up from his
chair, and with the impetuous fervour peculiar to Frenchmen, throw
himself on the breast of his benefactor. The transference of a bag full
of gold from the pocket of the grateful and rich tailor to that of good
Master Pye would then be but a matter of time.

But no such manifestations of joyful excitement occurred, and the
expression of triumph in the informer's face soon gave place to one of
anxiety.

M. Legros had looked up at his daughter, who stood beside him, pale and
thoughtful.

"I have not understood all that this man hath said, my jewel."

"'Tis as well, Father dear," she replied, "for methinks you would have
thrashed him to within an inch of his life. Nay!" she added coldly
as the Huguenot clerk--suddenly realising that matters were taking
a dangerous turn all unbeknown as yet to his companion--gripped the
latter's arm and began to talk to him volubly in English, "you, sir,
need not warn your friend. I will tell him, myself, all that he need
know."

"Miserable perjurer," she continued, now speaking directly to Pye, "go
out of my father's house forthwith, ere he understands more of your
villainies and breaks his stick across your back, as he would over
that of a mad and vicious cur. I have listened to your lies, your evil
projects, your schemes of villainies only because I wished to know the
extent of your infamy and gauge the harm which your perjuries might
cause. Now, with the help of God, I can yet warn him, who though he may
have injured me, is nevertheless my husband in the sight of Heaven.
Your perjuries will do you no good--they will mayhap lead you and your
friends to the gallows. If there is justice in England your lies will
lead you thither. Now you can go, ere I myself beg my father to lay his
dog-whip across your back."

Daniel Pye's surprise was quite boundless. It had never for a moment
entered his head that the tailor and his family would not join readily
in any project for the undoing of my lord Stowmaries. He blamed
himself for having been too precipitate; he would have liked to argue
and mayhap to persuade, but though he did not understand the French
language, he guessed by the expression in the master tailor's eyes, as
his daughter now spoke with cold decision to him, that the moment was
not propitious for a prolonged stay in this inhospitable house.

The look of terror on his interpreter's face also warned him that a
hasty retreat would be the most prudent course; already M. Legros was
gripping his stick very ominously.

But by the time the old man had struggled to his feet, Daniel Pye and
his companion had incontinently fled. They had reached the door, torn
it open and were out in the street even before M. Legros had time to
throw his stick after them.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV

                      A saint whose perfect soul
                      With perfect love for goal
                      Faith hardly might control,
                      Creeds might not harden.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


When Legros was alone once more with his daughter he asked for a fuller
explanation.

"I wish, my jewel, that you had not interfered," he said reproachfully,
"when first I desired to kick those rascals out of doors. My first
instinct was right, you see."

"Nay, but, Father dear," she said gently, "I am glad that you yielded
to me in this. If we had not listened to what these men said, we should
know nothing of the villainies which they are concocting, and could not
warn those whom they attack."

"Methinks that were no concern of ours," retorted her father gruffly.

"They are proposing to bring false accusations of treason against Lord
Stowmaries," urged Rose Marie, almost reproachfully.

"And what is that to us, my child?"

"Lord Stowmaries is my husband, Father; to-morrow we set out on a
journey in order to ask him to render me justice--and this we do on
Monseigneur's advice."

"There is no obligation on our part to undertake the journey."

"There was none yesterday, Father dear, but there is to-day."

"To-day? Why?"

"Because to-day we know that Lord Stowmaries--my husband--is in danger
of his life, and that we can, mayhap, give him timely warning."

"Lord Stowmaries is so little thy husband, child, that even to-day
when thou thinkest of saving him from these perjurers, he goes about
carrying in the pocket of his coat the dispensation to repudiate thee,
which he hath obtained from His Holiness by a misrepresentation of
facts."

Even as he spoke these harsh words--and he spoke them roughly, too--the
good tailor took his daughter's hand tenderly in his, and stroked it,
as if to mitigate by this loving touch the cruelty of the words. But
the child who had been once so yielding and submissive was now an
obstinate woman.

"All the more reason, Father dear," she said, "for proving to my Lord
Stowmaries that he hath deeply wronged me, and that I am worthy to be
his wife."

He was wholly unaccustomed to this new phase in his daughter's
character. She had always been of a meek, gentle disposition, still a
child in her expressions of loving obedience, in her tender, clinging
ways. Now, suddenly she seemed to have a will of her own. She it was
who had decreed that Monseigneur's advice should be followed, she it
was now who refused to give up all thoughts of the journey.

Let us confess that worthy M. Legros was now for awaiting events. If
the rascals spoke true, God Himself had provided a glorious vengeance
against the dastardly young reprobate who had so ill-used Rose Marie.
Papa Legros of a truth did not see that she--the injured wife--was
called upon to move a finger in the cause of a man who had paid another
to dishonour her. There are times and circumstances in life when the
meekest of men become as ravenous tigers. The kindly tailor had a heart
of gold, a simple mind and an adoring fondness for his child. He would
never have done the meanest man any hurt. Yet in this case, and because
of the terrible wrong done to his Rose Marie, he almost gloated on the
thought of the troubles which were about to descend on Stowmaries.
Vaguely the hope wormed itself into his heart that my lord would cease
to exist--painlessly if possible--still that he would cease to be,
and then Rose Marie would be free, a child-widow, who might yet find
happiness in the arms of a good man.

But not one thought of Michael in all this! Legros himself would not
let his mind dwell on that reprobate whom he had loved as a son. And
Rose Marie? Did she perchance, when thinking of her journey to England,
feel a vague thrill of hope that she might see him there?

Who shall pry into the secret orchard, the key of which lies hid in a
young girl's heart. Those who knew Rose Marie both before and after
the tragic episode of the mock marriage, declared that she had a great
desire to see Michael Kestyon again.

If only to tell him that she had not forgiven him--that she would never
forgive--and never, never forget.




                             CHAPTER XXXV

    Steep and deep and sterile, under fields no plough can tame,
    Dip the cliffs full-fledged with poppies red as love or shame.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


And it was in consequence of Monseigneur the Archbishop's advice, and
of maman's desire that this advice be acted upon, that anon we see
Master Legros, tailor-in-chief to His Majesty, the King of France,
journeying with his daughter to England.

But this was chiefly, too, because of what Daniel Pye, the informer,
had gone over to Paris to say. Nothing would take it out of Rose
Marie's head that it was her duty now, if ever, to be loyal to the
man who was still her husband in the sight of God. He could repudiate
her--if His Holiness gave him leave--but two great wrongs could never
make one simple right.

She, Rose Marie, had no dispensation to break the marriage vows of
eighteen years ago. She had done no wrong to justify a dissolution of
that marriage. Her husband was her husband; he was in danger of losing
his honour and his life. She could at least give him timely warning.

If she failed in this, her duty, then indeed would she deserve the
scorn of the world, the repudiation and the disgrace which pertains to
the unfaithful wife.

On a beautiful sunny day early in October, Master Legros and his
daughter first caught sight of the white cliffs of England gleaming
beneath the kiss of the radiant sun. Rose Marie had sat silently,
meditatively, in the prow of the boat; she had gazed during the past
few hours into that distant horizon whereon trembled a heat-laden mist.
The titanic band of gilded atoms had long hidden from her view the
shores of that mysterious country wherein he dwelt.

England to her meant the land where Michael Kestyon lived, and with
aching eyes and throbbing heart she watched and watched, waiting for
that first view when the mist would part and reveal to her the soil on
which his foot was wont to tread. How starved was her heart that even
that thought was a solace; the sensation of putting her foot down on
the selfsame land whereon he dwelt was almost a consolation.

She gazed at the white cliffs like one anhungered, and as the
slowly-moving boat drew nearer to this new land of promise, the sun
slowly setting in the west changed with a touch of the fairy wand the
white cliffs into gold.

She thought England beautiful both in the long twilight when mysterious
veils of grey and mauve soften the outlines of the distant landscape,
and in the glory of noon when tiny clouds chase one another across a
sky of tender sapphire blue. She loved the early morning when every
blade of grass on the crest of the cliffs at Dover was adorned by a
tiny brilliant diamond, and she loved the midday sun which had drawn
the breath of the dew until its soul had passed into delicate golden
vapours.

She loved the quaintly-arrayed army of fruit trees in the orchards,
the tender green of the lawns, the ruddy tints of early autumn which
clothed the hillside with a brilliant mantle of gold. No! She could not
believe that in this land of beauty, of peace and of plenty, all men
were born traitors, all men were liars and thieves of honour.

Some subtle change came over them, no doubt, and their bravery, their
loyalty, passed away from them, revealing the devil which had taken
possession of their soul. She would persist in thinking that Michael,
whom she had loved, was a different man to the one who stood before
her, accused and self-convicted--more shamed than she whom he had
wronged.

Thus her thoughts kept her body alert and she scarcely felt the fatigue
of that long, lumbering drive on the stage-coach between Dover and
London. There was so much to see and so much to think on and to plan.
The very next day her father should seek out my lord of Stowmaries and
tell him all that was brewing against him. It was surely more than
likely that my lord would be grateful and in his gratitude strive to
undo the mischief which his own wantonness had created.

What this would mean to Rose Marie she had not even dared to ask
herself. A strong sense of right and of justice and an overwhelming
love for her parents had prompted her to offer herself a willing
sacrifice for their happiness. Her own poor heart was already so
bruised, so battered, almost broken in its agony of sorrow, what
mattered a little more humiliation, a few more tears, another pang?

Rose Marie sighed with regret when in the gloaming the stage-coach
finally left behind it the orchards and green pastures of Kent and
rattled over the cobblestones of the big city. At seven o'clock, with
much rattle of chains and billets, many shouts from driver and ostler
and much champing of bits, the big vehicle swung through the gates of
the yard at Savage's Bell Inn near Lud Gate. Here the tailor and his
daughter meant to put up, the hostelry having been warmly recommended
to him by several business friends who travelled to and fro from London
to Paris.

As Rose Marie climbed down from the top of the coach, it seemed to her
that despite the fast-gathering gloom within the enclosed yard, she
could recognise the face of Master Daniel Pye among the crowd who were
assembled to witness the arrival of the coach.

The face disappeared in the crowd almost as soon as she had recognised
it, but the brief vision left her with a great sense of satisfaction
that obviously the journey had not been undertaken in vain. The man
had taken the trouble to watch and to wait, obviously fearing that
his nefarious plans might be frustrated by those whom he had hoped to
enlist on his side.

Neither Rose Marie nor good M. Legros slept much that night. The
fatigue of the journey, the sound of many voices jabbering in a tongue
unfamiliar to their ear, chased sleep resolutely away. Only toward
early morning did father and daughter, each in their respective very
uncomfortable beds, fall into troubled slumber.

Master Legros dreamt of the morrow's meeting with his lordly
son-in-law, and Rose Marie fell asleep wondering in what quarter of the
great city dwelt the man whose very image she would wish to blot out of
her memory.




                             CHAPTER XXXVI

             These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
             One time or other, break some gallows back.
                                             --2 HENRY IV. IV. 3.


Master Daniel Pye had certainly thought it wiser--after that
precipitous exit from the master tailor's house--to watch and to await
events. He had been wholly taken by surprise at M. Legros' reception
of his news, and staggered at the thought that where he had sought a
patron, or at least an ally, he had found an active enemy.

He soon learned that preparations were being actively pushed forward
in the house of the Rue de l'Ancienne Comédie for the journey of the
master and his daughter to England. Pye and his interpreter, therefore,
well-disguised and travelling as the poorest of men in the wake of
their betters, reached Dover by the same packet boat that had brought
the Legros hither. While the latter took rest at a small hostelry
in the town, awaiting the day when a stage-coach would take them to
London, Pye made his way straight to the great city, using what humble
conveyances he contrived to hire for some portions of the road.

The yard of Savage's Bell Inn near Lud Gate was the halting place
of the stage-coach from Dover, and thither Pye repaired on those
afternoons--three days in the week--when a complement of voyagers from
France were expected. It was quite simple, and within forty-eight hours
Pye found his patience rewarded and his worst fears justified. The good
tailor had obviously come to London in order to warn Lord Stowmaries
of the mischief that was brewing against him.

Fortunately Pye had his false information against my lord ready, even
before he had set out for Paris. His friend, the Huguenot clerk, had
writ out the deposition in a good round hand, and Daniel Pye had
sworn to it before a commissioner. All he had to do now was to lodge
it with Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, who had already received the sworn
depositions of Titus Oates and of Tongue.

Lord Stowmaries' name also figured on the Oates indictment as one
of those who were said to have been present at the famous "consult"
whereat the Duke of York was offered the crown of England by the
Catholic peers of this realm at the express desire of the Pope of Rome.

Daniel Pye had incontinently sworn to everything that had been asked of
him. He pretended a close intimacy with my lord of Stowmaries, and was
prepared to take all the solemn oaths that were required to the effect
that he had overheard my lord express loudly every kind of treasonable
wish--notably that of seeing the king duly poisoned by his physician.

But for all these false accusations, Pye presently discovered that he
could only get about £20 as a reward, and that only if the indictment
was proved on evidence. The commissioners had already told him that in
order to bring his accusations home it were better that another witness
came forward to swear to the same story. This is where the help of the
French tailor or of the wench would have been so useful for--as luck
and his own eagerness would have it--Pye had declared in his original
affidavit that he had overheard my lord Stowmaries' treasonable
conversations at a hostelry in Paris.

Pye had thought thereby to give more verisimilitude to his story, and
even Master Tongue had approved of this plan, when he heard the man
declaring emphatically that the tailor's daughter would only be too
ready to swear away the life of the man whom she must hate with all the
bitter sense of an overwhelming wrong.

Thus therefore did the accusation stand. Master Daniel Pye had sworn
that when he was at the hostelry of the "Rat Mort," in Paris, on April
19th of this same year of grace, he had overheard my lord of Stowmaries
talking--with one of the ministers of the King of France--of the terms
of a treaty whereby the Papist peers of England would acclaim the
Duke of York as King of England and vassal of the Pope, and receive a
subsidy of five million livres from King Louis for their pains.

It was indeed a splendid story. No wonder that Master Pye was
over-pleased with it; he had added the final touch of apparent truth to
it by stating that M. Legros--a French subject--and his daughter--the
reputed and repudiated wife of the accused--were also present at the
"Rat Mort" on that occasion and had also overheard this conversation,
and would testify as to the verity thereof.

Imagine the disappointment, the vexation, nay, the grave fears now
engendered in Master Pye's mind at thought that the tailor and his
wench meant to frustrate his schemes completely, and not only to throw
discredit on the elaborate accusation, but even mayhap to prejudice the
payment of that meagre reward of £20.

When Master Legros, accompanied by his daughter arrived at the Bell
Inn, Daniel Pye was at first seized with a mad desire to try and
influence them yet once again in his own favour. Remember that Pye was
little more than an uncouth peasant, with just as much knowledge of
other people's natures as he had gleaned through daily contact with his
own underlings.

He could not get it into his head that the Legros really meant to
forego the happy sensation of a complete revenge, and half thought
that, mayhap, they had misunderstood the whole scheme during that
stormy interview in the back shop, when there was so much talk of stick
and of dog-whip, and not nearly enough of just reward for a great
service rendered.

At the last moment, however, when Legros had alighted from the coach
and had somewhat impatiently ordered beds and board, Daniel Pye's heart
misgave him, and he felt afraid to encounter the irascible little
tailor's wrath.

Once more he sought out his friend, the needy and out-at-elbows
Huguenot clerk, and offered him a shilling to go the next morning to
the Bell Inn and to watch the Legros' movements. Quite a goodly amount
of Master Pye's savings were now dwindling away in this direction.

"Do you try and get speech with the tailor," he said to the young
scribe, "and try by your great skill to make him believe that you would
wish to serve him, seeing that you have quarrelled with me and are now
penniless. These people must of a truth be friendless and lonely in
London; who knows but that they may take you as their guide, in which
case all you need do is to try and prevent by every means in your power
that they have speech with Lord Stowmaries for the next few days. Once
my lord is duly arrested on our information, strangers will, of course,
have no access to him; the trials we know are to be hurried through
very quickly and there would then be no fear of our losing our just
rewards."

Well schooled in the part which he had to play, the Huguenot clerk duly
installed himself just outside the gates of the yard of the Bell Inn
on the following morning, and by ten o'clock he had the satisfaction
of seeing Master Legros obviously bent on obtaining information, and
wandering for that purpose somewhat disconsolately about the yard,
seeing that no one there was able to converse with him in his own
tongue.

This was the clerk's opportunity. He slipped through the gate, and
doffing his soft cap, humbly accosted the foreign gentleman.

"Can I be of service, Master?" he said in French. "I am an interpreter
by trade."

"And if I mistake not," replied the tailor suspiciously, "you are one
of two damned blackguards who came to my house in Paris with some lying
tale of Papist conspiracy against my lord Stowmaries, some few days
ago."

"Hush, hush, good Master, I entreat you," quoth the clerk with
well-feigned alarm, and throwing quick, furtive glances around him;
"the subject is not one which must be discussed aloud just now."

"And why, sirrah, must it not be discussed aloud?"

"Because to call yourself a Papist just now, my Master, is synonymous
to proclaiming yourself a traitor. Your very life would not be safe
in this yard. A reign of terror hath set in in England. The peaceful
citizens themselves go about the streets carrying flails hidden in the
pockets of their breeches to defend themselves against the Jesuits.
Nay, Master, an your business is not urgent, I entreat you to return to
France, ere you or your daughter come to any harm."

"My business with my lord Stowmaries is urgent," said Legros with
characteristic hot-headed impulsiveness; "an you'll direct me to his
house, there'll be a shilling or mayhap two for you."

"In the name of Heaven, good Master," ejaculated the clerk in an
agonised whisper, "do not speak that name aloud. My lord is in very bad
odour. His arrest is imminent and all his friends are like to fare as
badly as himself."

"All the more reason why I should speak with him at once. So now,
sirrah! Wilt earn that shilling and direct me to his house, or wilt
thou not?"

"Alas, kind sir, I am a poor man, a starving man since that traitor,
Daniel Pye, hath turned against me, seeing that I would not aid him in
his conspiracies. And I'll gladly earn a shilling, kind sir, and direct
you to the house of my lord Stowmaries, an you will deign to place
yourself under my protection."

Truly Master Legros had no cause not to accept the clerk's offer.
However villainous the man's conduct might or might not be, there could
be no harm in accepting his escort in broad daylight as far as the
house of my lord of Stowmaries.

Legros was a complete stranger in the English city, which he thought
overwhelmingly vast and terribly dirty. He had heard many tales of the
plague in London, and though this had occurred thirteen years ago, he
still thought the place infected and mistrusted the hackney coaches and
carrying chairs which were plying the streets for hire.

After hurried consultation with his daughter, he decided that no harm
could come of being escorted by the clerk through the streets of
London. The latter spoke French and would be vastly useful, and he
could easily be dismissed, once my Lord Stowmaries' house had been
reached.

Good M. Legros was suffering from an unusually severe attack of chronic
fussiness. He could not have sat still another hour, and was for
starting immediately for my lord's house. Rose Marie had no reason for
wishing to put off that interview, the thought of which she abhorred
more and more strongly as the time for its occurrence drew nigh.

She was conscious of a desire to get it over, to put finality between
the inevitable and her own ever-rebellious hopes. For her parents'
sake she wanted to see Lord Stowmaries grateful and yielding; for her
own she almost wished that he remained obdurate. She would gladly have
purchased her freedom at the price of more bitter humiliation than
she had yet endured, yet she had set herself the task of purchasing
the content and happiness of those she cared for at the price of her
freedom and the most bitter of all humiliation.

These contradictory thoughts and wishes fretted her and rendered her
nervous and agitated. But at her father's bidding, she was ready to
make a start.

When Legros once more came down into the courtyard, dressed for the
momentous visit, and with his daughter on his arm, the Huguenot clerk
was nowhere to be seen. He soon reappeared, however, almost breathless
from fast running, but seemingly ready to accompany the distinguished
foreign visitors withersoever they wished to go.

He had just had time in the interim to consult with Master Daniel Pye
as to what had best be done.

"If I do not take that accursed tailor over to my lord Stowmaries, some
one else will for sure," he said disconsolately.

"Let me think for a moment," quoth Pye, with an anxious frown on his
lowering brow. "I understand that the arrest of my lord is imminent--if
only we can put off this meddlesome Frenchman for to-day, I do verily
believe that all will be well. For the nonce you had best tell him
that my lord Stowmaries is from home, but is expected daily, hourly,
to return. Thus we might gain twenty-four hours, for you would tell the
same tale again in the afternoon--after that your wits should give you
counsel. Am I not paying you that they should be of service to me?"

Thus it was that when the clerk arrived breathless in the yard of
the Bell Inn, where Master Legros was impatiently awaiting him, he
excused himself for his absence on the grounds that he had--surely with
commendable forethought--taken the precaution to make enquiries as to
whether my lord of Stowmaries was at home.

"My lord's house is some distance from here," he explained, "and I
thought to save you and the fair mistress a fruitless walk through the
city."

"Then 'twas mightily officious of you, sirrah?" quoth the irascible
tailor, "to meddle with what doth not concern you."

"Zeal in your service prompted me, good master, and as my lord of
Stowmaries is from home, I have the honour of saving you much fatigue."

"My lord is from home, did you say?" queried Legros in a tone of
obvious disappointment.

"Ay, good master; but his servants expect to see him back to-morrow."

"We will find out for ourselves, Father dear, when my lord is
expected home," here interposed Rose Marie, with her usual quiet air
of decision; "no doubt there are others in London besides this same
officious clerk who will guide us to his house."

We may imagine that at this point the pious young Huguenot formulated
an inward but very emphatic "Damn!" cursing the interference of young
damsels and their impatient ways.

Not having his principal to consult with, he was momentarily thrown
on his own resources of wit and of readiness. This was certainly an
occasion when the devil should aid those who serve him well. The clerk
had only a very slight moment of hesitation, then a brilliant idea
seemed to strike him, for his wizened face brightened up visibly.

"Fair Mistress," he said in tones of respectful reproach, "far be it
from me to shirk my duty toward you. An you'll permit me I'll escort
you to the house of my lord of Stowmaries forthwith."

"Then, why so much talking, sirrah," rejoined Papa Legros. "March, and
briskly, too. I have a convenient stick which oft works wonders in
making laggards walk briskly. Go ahead; my daughter and I will follow."




                            CHAPTER XXXVII

            "I will hold your hand but as long as all may,
             Or so very little longer."
                                                      --BROWNING.


After half an hour's continuous walking--for the roads out of London
were over-bad after the heavy rains during the past week--the Huguenot
clerk, closely followed by Master Legros, who had his daughter on his
arm, turned into the new parish of Soho, where a number of fine houses
had been recently erected, and a few more were even now in process of
construction.

The clerk had at first seemed desirous of imparting various scraps of
topographical information to his compatriots, but to his interesting
conversation the tailor only responded in curt monosyllables. He
still harboured a vague mistrust against his guide. The latter part
of the walk through the ill-paved, muddy and evil-smelling streets of
London was therefore accomplished in silence. Rose Marie's nerves were
tingling with excitement, and she shivered beneath her cloak and hood,
despite the warmth of this fine summer afternoon.

Soon the little party came to a halt before a newly-built house,
fashioned of red brick with a fine portico of stone, richly carved and
tall, arched windows set in flush with the outside walls and painted in
creamy white.

"Here lives my lord of Stowmaries," said the clerk, as without waiting
for further permission he plied the brass knocker vigorously. "Shall I
ask if he hath come home?"

The tailor nodded in assent. He, too, was now getting too excited to
speak. The next moment a serving-man, dressed in clothes of sober grey,
opened the front door, and to the clerk's query whether my lord was at
home, he replied in the affirmative.

Master Legros and Rose Marie were far too troubled in their minds to
notice the furnishings and appointments of the house. Rose Marie threw
the hood back from her face, and asked whether they could speak with my
lord forthwith.

"Will you tell him, I pray you," she added, "that Monsieur Legros from
Paris desires speech with him."

Legros dismissed the clerk--who was eager enough to get away--by
bestowing a shilling upon him, and after that he and his daughter
followed the serving-man through the hall into a small withdrawing room
where they were bidden to wait.

A few moments of suspense--terrible alike to the girl and to the
father--then a firm tread on the flagged floor outside; a step that
to Rose Marie's supersensitive ear sounded strangely, almost weirdly
familiar.

The next moment Michael Kestyon had entered the room.

"You have come to speak with me, good M. Legros--" he said even as he
entered. Then he caught sight of Rose Marie and the words died on his
lips.

They looked at one another--these two who once had been all in all one
to the other--parted now by the shadow of that unforgettable wrong.

Instinctively--with eye fixed to eye--each asked the other the mute
question: "Didst suffer as I did?" and in the heart of each--of the
defiant adventurer, and the unsophisticated girl--there rose the wild,
mad thrill, the triumphant, exulting hosanna, at sight of the lines of
sorrow, so unmistakable, so eloquent on the face so dearly loved.

Rose Marie saw at once how much Michael had altered--that tender,
motherly instinct inseparable from perfect womanhood told her even
more than that which the sunken eyes and the drawn look in the face so
pathetically expressed.

Yet outwardly he had changed but little; the step--as he rapidly
crossed the room--had been as firm, as elastic as of old; he still
carried his head high, and his manner--as of yore--was easy and
gracious. When he had first entered, there was even an eager, joyful
expression in his face. He did not know, you see, that M. Legros'
visit to him was the result of a mistake, the freak of a mischievous
clerk. He really thought that the good tailor had come here to see
him, Michael, and the news had brought almost joy to his heart and had
accelerated his footsteps as he flew down to greet his visitor.

No, the change was in none of these outward signs. It was the spirit
in him which had changed. The dark eyes once so full of tenderness had
a cold, steely look in them now, which was apparent even through the
first pleasurable greeting. The mouth, too, looked set in its lines;
the lips, which ere this were ever wont to smile, were now tightly
pressed as if for ever controlling a sigh or trying to suppress a cry
of pain.

Michael--with the eyes of a man hungering for love--gazed on his
snowdrop and saw the change which the past dark months had wrought on
the former serenity of her face. And if he had suffered during that
time the exquisite pangs of mad and hopeless longing, how much more
acute did that pain seem now that he saw her, looking pale and fragile,
almost frightened, too, in his presence, cold as she had been ere that
mad glad moment when he had held her--a living, loving woman--in his
arms, with the hot blood rushing to her cheeks at his whispered words
of passion, and the light of love kindled in her eyes.

Can brain of man or of torturing devils conceive aught so cruel as this
living, breathing embodiment of the might-have-been; this tearing of
every heart-string in the maddening desire for one more embrace, one
last lingering kiss, one touch only of hand against hand, one final
breath of life--after which, death and peace?

As in a dream, good Master Legros' diffident voice struck on Michael's
ear:

"It was with my lord of Stowmaries that we wished to speak."

And directly after that, Rose Marie's trembling tones, half-choked with
sobs resolutely suppressed:

"Let us go, Father--we--we must not stay here--let us go--"

She had drawn close to her father, and was twining her hands round his
arm trying to drag him away.

The sad pathos of this appeal--this clinging to another as if for
protection and help, whilst he--Michael--stood by--nothing to her,
less than nothing, a thing to fear, to hate, mayhap, certainly to
despise--struck him as with a whip-lash across his aching breast. But
it woke him from his dream. It brought him back to earth, with senses
bruised and temples throbbing, his pride of manhood brought down to the
dust of a childish desire to keep her here in his presence if only for
a moment, a second; to hear her speak, to look on her, to endure her
scorn if need be, only to have her there.

Therefore, he turned to Papa Legros and almost humbly said:

"Will you at least tell me, good Master, if I cannot serve you in any
way?"

"No, sir, you cannot," replied Papa Legros gruffly. "I would have you
believe and know that we came here under a misapprehension. A miscreant
interpreter brought us hither, though he was bidden to take us to the
house of Lord Stowmaries. We did not know that this was your house,
sir, or believe me, we had never entered it."

"This is not my house," rejoined Michael gravely. "It is that of my
mother, who hath left her Kentish village in order to dwell with me.
For the rest, the misapprehension is most easy of explanation; nor is
your interpreter so very much to blame."

He paused for the space of a second or two, then fixing steady eyes on
the face of Rose Marie and throwing his head back with an air that was
almost defiant in its pride, he said:

"You asked to speak with my lord of Stowmaries--'tis I who am the lord
of Stowmaries now."

Then, as Legros, somewhat bewildered, stared at him in blank surprise,
he added more quietly:

"You did not know this, mayhap?"

"No--no--my lord," stammered the tailor, who of a truth felt strangely
perturbed, "we--that is, I and my daughter did not know that--"

"His Majesty gave his decision late last night."

There was a moment's silence in the room. It seemed as if Michael was
anticipating something, waiting for a word from Rose Marie. His very
attitude was an expectant one; he was leaning forward, and his eyes had
sought her lips, as if trying to guess what they would utter.

"Then the title which you borrowed from your cousin awhile ago, and to
some purpose, you have now succeeded in filching from him altogether?"
said the girl coldly.

If she had the desire to hurt him, she certainly did succeed. Michael
did not move, but his cheeks, already pale, turned to ashy grey; the
eyes sank still deeper within their sockets, and in a moment the face
looked worn and haggard as that of a man with one foot in the grave.

Then he said slowly:

"Your pardon, Mistress; I have filched naught which was not already
mine, mine and my father's before me. That which I took was my right;
it is also my mother's, who for years had been left to starve whilst
another filched from her that which was hers. For her sake did I claim
that which was mine, because during all those years of starvation,
misery and degradation--her misery and mine own degradation--she kept
up her faith in me. And also for mine own sake did I claim my right,
and in order to mend a wrong which, it seems, I had committed. Good
Master Legros," he added, turning to the vastly bewildered tailor, "as
Lord of Stowmaries I entered your house and, methinks, your heart. Of
this I am not ashamed; the wrong that I did you is past; the righting
thereof will last my lifetime and yours. I was Lord Stowmaries then by
the word of God--I am that now by the word of the King and Parliament.
That which seemed a lie I have proved to be true. Will you give me
back your daughter, whom the caprice of a wanton reprobate would have
cast from him, and whom I have justly won, by my deeds, by my will, by
my crime if you call it so, but whom I have won rightfully and whom I
would wish to render happy even at the cost of my life."

Gradually, as he spoke, the tone of defiance died out of his voice
and only pride remained expressed therein--pride and an infinity of
tenderness. There was no attempt at mitigating the fault that was
past, no desire to excuse or to palliate. The man and his sin were
inseparable; obviously had the sin to be again committed, Michael would
have committed it again, with the same determination and the same
defiance.

"I am a man, and what I do, I do. I won you by a trick. I fought for
your love and won it. Mine enemy put a weapon in my hand. With it I
conquered him; I conquered Fate and you. Had I been ashamed of the act,
I had never committed it. I looked sin squarely in the face and took it
by its grim hand and allowed it to lead me to your feet. To you I never
lied; you I do not cheat."

These thoughts and more were fully expressed in his eyes as they
rested on Rose Marie, and so subtle is the wave of sympathy that she
understood every word which he did not utter; she understood them, even
though she steeled her heart against the insidious whisperings of a
drowsy conscience.

We may well imagine that on the other hand, good M. Legros, though
he did not altogether grasp the proud sophistries of such a splendid
blackguard, nevertheless quickly ranged himself against the whole array
of all the grim virtues. Would you blame him very much if you knew that
within the innermost recesses of his kindly and simple heart he no
longer greatly desired to speak with the man whom he had come all the
way from Paris to supplicate and to warn?

Was it very wrong, think you, very self-interested on the part of
this amiable little tailor to be now cursing those very necessities
engendered by an ultrasensitive sense of loyalty which imposed on him
the task of cleaving to that man who was now dispossessed, beggared, a
most undesirable husband for his beautiful daughter?

Truly the situation, from the point of view of conscience and of
decency, was a very difficult one. Is it a wonder that the doting
father was quite unable to grapple with it?

Here was a man who was a terrible scoundrel, yet a mightily pleasing
one for all that. He was now rich, of high consideration and power;
he professed and undoubtedly felt a great and genuine love for Rose
Marie. On the other hand, the other--his daughter's rightful lord--only
too ready, nay, anxious, to repudiate her--who truly was a far greater
blackguard and not nearly such an attractive one--he was now poor and
insignificant--always providing that Michael Kestyon's story was true
and--and--

Good M. Legros' conscience was having such a tough fight inside him
that he had to take out his vast, coloured handkerchief and to mop his
forehead well, for he was literally in a sweat of intense perturbation.
He would not meet Michael's enquiring eyes, lest the latter should
read in his own the ready assent which they proclaimed. The worst of
the situation was that good M. Legros was bound to leave the ultimate
decision to his daughter, and alas, he knew quite well what that
decision would be. And God help them all, but he was bound to admit
that that decision was the only right one, in the sight of the Lord and
of all His self-denying and uncomfortably rigid saints.

Even now Rose Marie's clear voice, which had lost all its childlike
ring of old and all its light tones of joy, broke in on her father's
meditation.

"Sir, or my lord," she said coldly, "for of a truth I know not which
you are, meseems you do a cowardly thing by appealing to my father.
He would only have my earthly welfare in view, and even in this he
might be mistaken if he thought that my earthly welfare could lie
there, where there is disloyalty and shameless betrayal. For all your
pride, good sir, and for all your defiance, you cannot e'en persuade
yourself that what you do is right. As for me, I am a wife--not yours,
my lord--despite the trick wherewith you drew from me an oath at the
altar. I swore no love, no allegiance to any man save to him whom
you have now wholly despoiled and beggared--nay," she added with a
look of pride at least as great as his own, "I need no reminder, sir,
that I stand here, a cast-out wife, repudiated for no fault of mine
own, but through an infamy in which _you_ bore the leading hand. But,
nevertheless, I am a wife, and as such God hath enjoined me to cleave
to my husband. Since you have beggared him, I, thank God, can still
enrich him. Never have I blest my father's wealth so sincerely as now,
when it can go to proving to a scoffer that there is truth and loyalty
in women, even when sordid self-interest fights against truth and
justice. And if all the world, his king and country, turned against
my lord, I, his wife, good sir, his wife in the sight of God, despite
dispensations, despite courts of law and decrees of popes or kings, I,
his wife, for all that would still be ready to serve him."

Gradually her voice as she spoke had become more steady and also
less trenchant; there was a quiver of passion in it, the passion of
self-sacrifice. And he--poor man--mistook that warm, vibrating ring
in the sweet, tender voice for the expression of true love felt for
another.

"I did not know that you loved him, Rose Marie," he said simply.

She bent her head in order to hide the blush which rose to her cheeks
at his words. Was she thankful that he had misunderstood? Perhaps! For
of a truth it would make the battle less hard to fight, and would guard
against defeat. But, nevertheless, two heavy tears rose to her eyes,
and strive as she might she could not prevent their falling down onto
her hands which were clasped before her.

He saw the tears, and heard her murmur:

"He who was my lord of Stowmaries is a beggar now."

"No, not a beggar," he rejoined quietly, "for he is rich beyond the
dreams of men."

"Good sir--or--or my lord," here interposed Papa Legros, who was still
in a grave state of mental perturbation, "you see that the decision
doth not rest with me--Heaven help me, but with all your fault I
would--somehow--somehow have entrusted my child in your keeping with an
easy heart."

"And may God bless you for these words, good Master," said Michael
fervently.

"But you see, kind sir--I mean my lord--that this cannot be. My
lord of Stowmaries--if so be that he is that no longer--yet as lord
of Stowmaries he did wed my daughter. She feels--and rightly, too,
no doubt--that she owes fealty to him. God knows but 'tis all very
puzzling and I never was a casuist, but she says this is right and no
doubt it is. It had all been much easier but for this additional grave
trouble which threatens my lord."

"What additional grave trouble? I know of none such," queried Michael.

"A scoundrel, liar and perjurer hath laid information against my lord,
that he did conspire against the King of England."

"Impossible."

"Ay! 'tis true, good my lord. The damned ruffian came to Paris
to inform me of all the lies which he meant to tell against Lord
Stowmaries, hoping that I would be pleased thereat and would reward him
for his perjuries. I kicked him out of my house, and my daughter and I
came to warn my lord of the mischief that was brewing against him."

A frown of deep perplexity darkened Michael's brow.

"Good master tailor, I pray you leave me to see my cousin forthwith.
The trouble, alas, if your information be correct, is graver than even
you have any idea of. England is mad just now! Terror hath chased away
all her reason, and, God help her, all her sense of justice. It may
be that I shall have to arrange that my cousin leave the country as
soon as may be. An you return to France soon he could travel in your
company."

"I would wish to see my lord myself," said Rose Marie.

"Because you do not trust me?" he asked.

She would not reply to his look of reproach. How strange it is when
a wave of cruelty sweeps over a woman, who otherwise is tender and
kind and gentle. Rose Marie felt herself quite unable to stifle this
longing to wound and to hurt, even though her heart ached at sight of
the hopeless misery which was expressed in Michael's every movement,
in the tonelessness of his voice, and the drawn look in his face. Who
shall probe the secrets of a woman's heart, of a woman who has been
cheated of a great love even at its birth, of a woman who thought that
she had reached the utmost pinnacle of happiness only to find herself
hurled from those giddy heights down, down to an abyss of loneliness,
of lovelessness, and of bitter, undying memories.

"The child is unstrung, good my lord," here interposed Papa Legros
gently. "I pray, do not think that we do not trust in you. It were
better mayhaps that you did see Lord Stowmaries--er--your cousin--alas!
I know not how to call him now--and we'll to him this afternoon. He can
then best tell us what he desires to do."

"Come, Rose Marie, we had best go now," he added with a pathetic sigh,
which expressed all the disappointment of his kindly heart.

He picked up his soft felt hat and with gentle, trembling movement
twirled it round and round in his hand. Rose Marie drew the hood over
her hair and prepared to follow him.

It was all over then! The seconds had flown. She had come and would now
go again, leaving him mayhap a shade more desolate even than before.

It was all over, and the darkness of the past months would descend
on him once more, only that the darkness would be more dense, more
unbearable, because of this one ray of light--caused by her presence
here for these few brief moments.

Of a truth he had not known until now quite how much he had hoped,
during these past months whilst he fought his battle with grim and
steady vigour, winning step by step, until that last final decision of
the king, which gave him all that he wanted, all that he desired to
offer her.

Now she was going out of his life--for the second time--and it seemed
more irrevocable than that other parting at St. Denis. She was going
and there would not remain one single tiny spark of hope to light the
darkness of his despair.

Nothing would remain, only memory! Memory, on which the tears of Love
would henceforth for ever be fed. Her words might ring in his ears, her
image dwell in his mind, but his heart would go on starving, starving,
athirst for just one tiny remembrance on which to dwell until
mercifully it would break at last.

"May I not kiss your finger tips once more, Rose Marie?" he pleaded.

The words had escaped his lips almost involuntarily. The longing for
the tiny remembrance had been too strong to be stilled.

A kiss on her finger tips, one crumb of bread to a man dying of hunger,
the sponge steeped in water to slake a raging thirst.

She turned to him. The tears had dried on her cheeks by now, and her
eyes were seared and aching. She looked on his face, but did not lift
her hand. Papa Legros, who felt an uncomfortable lump in his throat,
busied himself with a careful examination of the door handle.

"It will probably be a long farewell," said Michael gently. "Will you
not let me hold your hand just once again, my snowdrop? Nay, not mine,
but another's--a king now amongst men."

Then, as very slowly, and with eyes fixed straight into his own, she
raised her hand up to his, he took it, and looked long at each finger
tip, tapering and delicately tipped with rose.

"See the epicure I am," he said, whilst a quaint smile played round
the corners of his lips; "your little hand rests now in mine. I know
that I may kiss it, that my lips may linger on each exquisite finger
tip, until my poor brain, dizzy with joy, will mayhap totter into the
land of madness. I know that I may kiss this cold little hand--so cold!
I know that it will chill my lips--and still I wait--for my last joy
now is anticipation. Nay, do not draw your hand away, my beautiful
ice-maid. Let me hold it just one little brief while longer. Are we not
to be friends in the future? Then as a friend may I not hold and kiss
your hand?"

She could not speak, for sobs which she resolutely suppressed would
rise in her throat, but she allowed her hand to rest in his; there was
some solace even in this slight touch.

"Is it not strange," he said, "that life will go on just the same? The
birds will sing, the leaves in autumn will wither and will fall. Your
dear eyes will greet the first swallow when it circles over the towers
of St. Gervais. Nature will not wear mourning because a miserable
reprobate is eating out his heart in an agony of the might-have-been."

"I pray you, milor, release my hand," she murmured, for of a truth she
no longer could bear the strain. "My father waits--"

"And the husband whom you love--nay, he must be a good man since God
hath loved him so--"

"Farewell, my lord."

"Farewell, Rose Marie--my rosemary--'tis for remembrance, you know."

He tasted the supreme joy to the full--all the joy that was left to him
now--five finger tips, cold against his burning lips, and they trembled
beneath each kiss. Then she turned and followed her father out of the
room.

For a moment he remained alone, standing there like one drunken or
dazed. Mechanically his hand went to the inner pocket of his coat and
anon he pulled out a withered, crumbling bunch of snowdrops, the tiny
bouquet which she had dropped at his feet that day in Paris, when
first he saw her, and her blue eyes kindled the flame of a great and
overwhelming passion.

Nay! thou art a man, and of what thou doest, thou art not ashamed;
but, proud man that thou art, there is thy Master, Love; he rules thee
with his rod of steel, and if thou sin, beware! for that rod will smite
thee 'til thou kneel humbly in the dust, with the weakness of unshed
tears shaming thy manhood, and with a faded bunch of snowdrops pressed
against thy lips, to smother a miserable, intensely human cry of awful
agony.




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII

               What be her cards you ask? Even these:--
               The heart, that doth but crave
               More, having fed; the diamond,
               Skilled to make base seem brave;
               The club, for smiting in the dark
               The spade, to dig a grave.
                                        --DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.


The one supreme moment of complete and abject weakness was soon
past; it had gone by in solitude. No one saw the fall of the defiant
reprobate brought to the dust by the intensity of his grief. No one but
God and triumphant Love.

Within a few minutes Michael had gathered together his scattered
senses. What avail were tears and the bitter joys of lingering memories
when there was still so much to do? Of a truth, Rose Marie's firm
attitude of loyalty towards her rightful husband had not so much
astonished Michael, for to a man who loves, the adored one necessarily
possesses every virtue that ever adorned the halo of a saint; but he
did not know that she loved her husband, and the warmth of her defence
of the absent one had, in Michael's ears, sounded like the expression
of her love. He did not stop to reason, to visualize the fact that Rose
Marie did not know Stowmaries, that the passion in her voice had the
ring of tragic despair in it, coupled with the sublime ardour of heroic
self-sacrifice.

A man in love never stops to reason. Passion and the dormant seeds of
ever-present jealousy still the powers of common sense.

The thought that Rose Marie loved him, the remembrance of that day when
he had held her in his arms, feeling her young body quivering at his
touch, seeing her eyes glowing in response to his ardour, her exquisite
lips moist with the promise of a kiss, these had been his life during
the past few months; they had been the very breath of his body, the
blood in his veins, the strength which bore him through all that he had
set himself to do.

The winning of name and estate, and then a reconquering of his
snowdrop, with a foregone certainty of victory ahead, that had been his
existence.

A foregone certainty of victory! How oft had he exulted at the thought,
drugging his despair with the intoxicating potion of hope, and now one
brief word from her and defeat had been more hopeless, more complete
than before.

"I am his wife," she said; "his wife in the sight of God; his wife
despite the infamy in which you bore the leading hand!"

Michael had thought of everything, had envisaged everything save
this: that Rose Marie would turn from him, because she loved the
other. Loyalty and love, love and passion, were all synonymous
to the impatient ardour, the proud defiance of this splendid
blackguard--splendid in this, that he never swerved from the path
into which he had once engaged his footsteps, never looked back with
purposeless longing, and neither cursed Fate nor ever gave way to
despair.

Even now, he pulled himself together, and within half an hour of the
Legros' departure from his house he was on his way to see his friend
Sir William Jones, the Attorney-General, first, and thence to his
cousin's house on the outskirts of Piccadilly.

Rupert Kestyon--by the king's mandate no longer Lord of Stowmaries
now--still occupied the same house into which he had made triumphant
entry some two years ago on the death of the old earl. It was an
ancient family mansion built a century and a half back, with gigantic
and elaborate coat of arms carved in stone above the majestic porch.
The serving-man who in response to Michael's peremptory knocking opened
the massive door to him, gave no outward sign that so great a change
had come, and with appalling suddenness, in the fortunes of his master.

He even addressed Michael as "sir" and spoke of "his lordship" being
still in his room upstairs.

Impatiently waving the man aside, Michael threw hat and cloak down in
the hall, and not waiting to be formally announced he ran quickly up
the broad staircase. He knew the house well, for in childhood he had
oft been in it, when his mother, holding him by the hand, came to ask
for pecuniary assistance from the wealthy kinsman.

Without hesitation, therefore, Michael went up to the door of the
principal bedroom and gave an impatient rap with his knuckles on the
solid panel.

A fretful "Come in!" from within invited him to enter.

Rupert Kestyon was lying on the monumental four-post bedstead stretched
out flat on his back and staring moodily into the glowing embers of the
wood-fire which was burning in the wide-open grate.

At sight of his cousin he jumped up to a sitting posture; a deep frown
of anger puckered his brow, and lent to the face a look of savagery. He
stared at Michael for awhile, more than astonished at this unlooked-for
appearance of his triumphant enemy; then he blurted out in his
overwhelming wrath:

"Out of my house! Out of my house, you thief--you--out of here, I
say--the men are still my servants--and I am still master here."

He put his feet to the ground, and made straightway for the door, but
Michael intercepted him, and gripping the young man's wrists with his
own strong fingers, he pushed him gently but firmly back.

"Easy, easy, Coz!" he said with kindly firmness; "by our Lady, but 'tis
poor policy to harass the harbinger of good news."

"Good news," quoth Rupert, who was boiling over with rage, "good news
from you, who have just robbed me of my inheritance!"

"'Twas an even game, good Coz," retorted Michael good-naturedly. "My
father, my mother and I had all been robbed in the past, and left in
a more pitiable plight, believe me, than it was ever my intention to
leave you."

"Prate not of your intentions, man. You used my money, the money I
myself did give you, in order to wage war against me, and press a claim
which you never would have made good but for that money which I gave
you."

"Let us be fair, good Coz. I offered you the whole of that money back
on that memorable night in April at the inn of St. Denis."

"Ay, on a ridiculous condition to which I cared not to agree."

"The ridiculous condition," said Michael gravely, "consisted in your
acknowledging as your lawful wife, an exquisitely beautiful and
virtuous lady who already had claim on your loyalty."

"The exquisitely beautiful lady," retorted Rupert with an ugly sneer,
"had, an I mistake not, already dragged her virtue in the wake of your
chariot, my friend."

"Silence, man," said Michael sternly, "for you know that you lie."

"Will you attempt to deny that your magnanimous offer at St. Denis was
made because you were in love with my wife?"

"I'll not deny it, but what my feelings were in the matter concerned no
one but myself."

"Mayhap, mayhap, but e'en you admit, good Coz," quoth Rupert with
obvious spite, "that a wife's conduct--"

"Your wife's conduct, Cousin, is beyond reproach," broke in Michael
calmly, "as you know right full well."

"Pardi! Since she is in love with you--"

"That, too, is a lie--She loves no one but you."

"Mayhaps she told you so?" queried the young man, as with a yawn of
ostentatious indifference he stretched himself out again--on a couch
this time, with one booted leg resting on the ground and tapping
it impatiently, whilst the other kicked savagely at an unoffensive
sofa-cushion, tearing its silk cover to shreds.

"Yes!" replied Michael calmly, "she hath told me so." Then as the other
broke into a loud, sarcastic laugh, he continued earnestly:

"Listen, Cousin, for what I am about to tell you concerns the whole
of your future. You are a penniless beggar now--nay, do not interrupt
me--I have well weighed every word which I speak, and have an answer
for each of your sneers--you are a penniless beggar--through no fault
of your own, mayhap, but I was a beggar, too, through none of mine. My
mother was left--almost to starve--alone in a God-forsaken village. For
years I kept actual starvation from her by courting wounds in order to
get blood-money. That has been your fault ever since the old uncle's
death, Cousin, for you knew that your kinswoman starved, and did
naught to help her. But that is over, let it pass! I was a wastrel, a
reprobate, a dissolute blackguard an you will! Had I been a better man
than I was, you had never dared to offer me money to dishonour a woman.
Let that pass too. But this I swear before God that I never meant to
dishonour the girl. I was ready to take her to my heart, to give her
all that she asked and more, the moment you in your wantonness had
cast her off. But she is too proud to take anything from me, and wants
nothing but her rights. Nay, you must listen to me patiently, till I
have told you all--She is loyal to you, with heart and soul and body,
and hath come to England to beg of you to render her justice."

"Have I not told you, man," here broke in Rupert Kestyon, with a
blasphemous oath which momentarily drowned the quieter tones of the
other man, "have I not told you that were that accursed tailor and his
miserable wench to go on their knees to me, I would not have her--no,
a thousand times no--with the last penny left in my pocket I'll obtain
the decree of nullity, and marry the woman whom I love--"

"If she'll have you, Cousin," quoth Michael drily, "now that you are a
beggar."

In a moment Rupert was on his feet again, burning with rage, swearing
mad oaths in his wrath, and clenching his fists with a wild desire to
rush at Michael and grip him by the throat.

"Nay, Coz," said the latter with a smile, "let us not fight like two
brawling villains. My fist is heavier than yours: and if you attack me,
I should have in defending mine own throat to punish you severely. But
why should you rage at me; I have come to you with good intent. Think
you, I would have left you to shift for yourself in this inhospitable
world? Great God, do I not know what it means to shift for oneself--the
misery, the wretchedness, the slow but certain degradation of mind and
of body? By all the saints, man, I would not condemn mine enemy to such
a life as I have led these past ten years."

"You do the tailor's wench no good anyhow by preaching to me," growled
Rupert sulkily, feeling somewhat shamed.

He sat down once more, in an attitude of dejection, resting his elbows
on his knees and burying his head in his hands.

"I did not come to preach," rejoined Michael quietly. "A blackguard
like me hath no right to preach, and a blackguard like you, Cousin, is
not like to listen. Nay, man, we are quits; we have both of us a pretty
black mark against us in the book of records up there. 'Tis nigh on a
year ago now that you came to me with your proposals. They have had far
wider reaching consequences than any of us had dreamed of at the time.
When I made a proposal to you at the inn at St. Denis, you refused my
terms peremptorily--they were not sufficiently munificent, it seems,
to tempt you to right a great wrong. I felt my weakness, then. I had
no more to offer than just the return of your own money. You were a
rich man still and could afford to pay largely for the satisfaction of
a wanton caprice. But now matters stand differently; the money which
you so contemptuously flung away at St. Denis hath borne royal fruit. I
made that money work; I forced it to toil and slave to gain my purpose.
I have beggared you, Cousin, and made myself powerful and strong,
not because I hated you, not because I any longer desire dignity and
riches, but because I wanted to hold in my hand a bribe that would be
regal enough to tempt you."

He paused awhile, with stern dark eyes fixed on the weak, somewhat
feminine face before him. Rupert Kestyon's vacillating pupils searched
his cousin's face, trying to divine his thoughts. He raised his head,
and rubbed his eyes, like a man wakened from sleep, and stared at
Michael as on a man bereft of his senses.

"I do not understand," he stammered in his bewilderment.

"Yet, 'tis simple enough," resumed Michael calmly. "The good tailor
whom you despise hath come over from France because he had heard
rumours that a charge of conspiracy against the king was being brought
against you by false informers."

"Great God!" murmured Rupert, who at these words had suddenly become
pale, whilst great beads of perspiration rose upon his forehead.

"Ay," said the other, "we know what that means, Cousin. Your name
amongst those implicated in this so-called Popish plot--think you
you'll escape the block? Hath any one escaped it hitherto who hath come
within the compass of the lies told by that scoundrel Oates?"

"It's not true," murmured Rupert Kestyon.

"What is not true? That the information hath been laid against you?
That, alas, is only too true. A man named Daniel Pye is the informant.
It seems that his former mistress--your own liege lady, Coz--had him
flogged for theft awhile ago. This has been his idea of revenge on
her--to bring you to disgrace or death, he cares not which, so long
as the desires of her life--which, it seems, are that she be wedded
to you--are frustrated. I have all this from the Attorney-General
whom I saw a quarter of an hour ago. Nay, there is no doubt that the
blackguard hath informed against you, and in a vastly circumstantial
manner. Come, you are a man, Coz," added Michael not unkindly, seeing
that Rupert was on the point of losing his wits in the face of the
awful prospect of this accusation, knowing full well its probable
terrible consequences, "and men in these troublous times must know how
to look on death in whatever grim guise it may appear."

"But not that," murmured the younger man involuntarily, "surely not
that--"

"I trust not," rejoined the other. "Have I not told you that I was the
bearer of good news?"

"Good news!"

"I own it sounds like irony, but, nevertheless, Coz, you'll presently
see that it is better than it seems. Let me resume, and tell you all
I know. Daniel Pye hath lodged his information against you. I have it
directly from Sir William Jones, who in his turn had it from Sir Edmund
Berry Godfrey. The villainous rogue says that on a certain day in April
he was at the hostelry of the 'Rat Mort' in Paris, in the company of
one Legros--tailor of Paris--and that there he overheard you talking
over with one of the ministers of the King of France, a plan whereby
Charles Rex is to be murdered, the Duke of York to be placed on the
English throne, and the whole of England sold to France and to Rome.
It is one of those impudent and dastardly lies which, alas, find ready
credence in our poor country just now. You remember Stailey's trial
on the information of that scoundrel Oates, who in spite of his own
obvious blunderings and contradictions was absolutely believed."

"I know, I know," said Rupert Kestyon with a groan, "I am undone,
I know. Cousin, I must fly the country at once--I can reach Dover
to-night."

"Nay, that you cannot, Cousin; your arrest is imminent. The warrant is
out and would take effect the moment you attempted to leave your house."

"But in the name of God, is there no way out?" came in tones of tragic
despair from the unfortunate man.

"Ay, that there is and a right simple one. The regal bribe, Cousin,"
said Michael with a grim smile, "which I promised to offer you."

"My life--do you mean my life? You have not the power to save my head
from the block. If I am arrested and brought to trial on one of these
infamous charges, the king himself could not save me."

"No; the king could not--but I can."

"How?"

"On one condition."

"I can guess it."

"The same I put before you at St. Denis."

Rupert Kestyon broke out into a laugh, a harsh, disagreeable laugh of
irony and of despair.

"Man, the wench would not have me now. Am I not beggared and a fugitive
from justice? Her father would now be the first to take her from me.
She married the Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx--"

But Michael interrupted him, saying:

"And after a brief sojourn with her in her old home in Paris you, as
Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, will bring your wife back as chatelaine
of Maries Castle, even before the last leaf has fallen from the oak."

"But you--'tis you who--"

"I stay here to meet the charge of high treason and conspiracy
preferred against the Earl of Stowmaries," said Michael very quietly.

Like one in a dream, Rupert Kestyon passed a trembling hand over his
damp forehead.

"You--you would--" he stammered.

"Am I not the Earl of Stowmaries?" queried the other simply. "Was I
not actually in Paris on that memorable day in April? True, I am not
a Romanist by religion, but the travesty of justice which, alas, now
goes on under the guidance of Chief Justice Scroggs, will not ask too
many questions and will be satisfied as long as it has one more prey to
throw to the hungering intolerance of the mob. When I am gone, Cousin,
you are the rightful heir to the title and estates which the king's
mandate hath just conferred on me. You see how simple it is. It but
rests with you to accept or refuse."

"But why--why should you do this?" murmured the other, whose brain
seemed almost reeling with this sudden transition from tragic despair
to the first glimmer of hope. "Why should you give your life--and--and
mayhap die such an awful death?"

"Not for love of you, Coz; you may take an oath on that," said Michael
with a humorous twinkle in his eye and a quick smile which softened the
former stern expression of his face.

"No, I know that," retorted the other, "'tis because you love her--my
wife."

"My head will no longer grace my shoulders when you return with your
bride to England, Cousin; you have therefore no cause for jealousy."

There was silence between the two men now. Rupert was of a truth too
dazed to understand fully all that his cousin's proposal would mean to
him.

"But, by the Mass, man!" he said, "I cannot accept such a sacrifice."

"'Twill not be the first act of cowardice that you'll have committed,
Cousin. This one will atone for the graver sin of a year ago. Take
what I offer you. Now that we are both face to face with the problem
of life or death, we can look back more soberly on the past. We have
both done an innocent woman an infinite wrong. Fate hath so shuffled
the cards that we can both atone; after all, methinks that mine is the
easier rôle. It is ofttimes so much simpler to die than to live. Nay,
Cousin, your part will not be altogether that of a coward, not even
though your path in life will henceforth be strewn with roses. She
loves you purely, loyally, good Coz. 'Tis your duty as a man to render
her happy. Above all, think not of me. Odd's fish, man, death and I
have looked at one another very straight many a time before--we are
friends, he and I."

"But not such a death, Cousin--and the disgrace--"

"Bah, even disgrace and I have held one another by the hand ere this.
And now before I leave you, Coz, your solemn word of honour that you
will make her happy, for by God!" he added more lightly, "methinks my
ghost would haunt you, if ever it saw her in tears."

"Will you take my hand, Cousin?" asked Rupert in simple response, as he
somewhat timidly held his hand out to the other man.

Michael took it without a word and thus at last were the hands of these
two men clasped for the first time in friendship. Kinsmen by blood,
Fate and human passions had estranged them from one another; yet it was
blood that told, else Rupert could not even for a moment--and despite
his love of life and joy in living--have accepted the sacrifice.

Even now he hesitated. This taking of his cousin's hand, this tacit
acceptance of another man's life to save his own, wore an ugly look of
cowardice and of dishonour. Yet the young man was no coward. In open
fight in a good cause, his valour would have been equal to that of any
man, and he would on the field of honour have met death, no doubt, with
fortitude. But what loomed ahead was far different to the glamour, the
enthusiasm of courting death for honour. It meant disgrace and shame,
the trial, the ignominy: death dealt by the hand of the executioner in
sight of a jeering mob. It meant the torture of long imprisonment in a
gloomy, filthy prison; it meant the ill-usage of warders and menials,
insults from the judge, rough handling by the crowd. It meant, above
all, the supreme disgrace of desecration after death, the traitor's
head on Tyburn gates, the body thrown to the carrion, an ignominy from
which even the least superstitious shrank in overwhelming horror.
Ay, and there was worse shame, more supreme degradation still--for a
traitor's death was rendered hideous by every means that the cruelty of
man could invent.

This picture stood on one side of Rupert Kestyon's vision, on the other
was only a hated marriage and the somewhat cowardly acceptance of
another man's sacrifice.

Rupert Kestyon did hesitate, the while the insidious voice of Luxury
and of Ease whispered sophistries in his ear:

"He does not do this for thee, man, but for the woman whom he loves.
Why shouldst thou stand in the way of thine own future comfort and
peace?"

The battle was a trying one and whilst it lasted Rupert Kestyon felt
unwilling to meet his cousin's eyes. Yet had he done so, he would have
seen nothing in them save expectancy, and from time to time that same
humorous twinkle, as if the man derived amusement from the conflict
which was raging within the other's heart.

As usual under these circumstances, Fate put her lean, sharp-pointed
finger into this grim pie, and it was the small incident which settled
the big issue in the end, for even as Rupert stood there, shamed,
hesitating, fighting the inward battle, there came a timid rap at the
door, and a serving-man entered, bearing a missive which was tied down
with green cord but otherwise left unsealed.

"What is this?" asked Rupert Kestyon, who seemed to be descending from
the stars, in so dazed a manner did he gaze at the man who was handing
him the letter.

"A man hath just brought it, my lord; he said that the message was
urgent but would not say from whence he came--he went away down the
street very quickly as soon as I had taken the letter from him."

"Good; you may go."

With hands still trembling from recent emotion, Rupert Kestyon, as
soon as the servant had gone, tore open the missive, on the outside
cover of which he had at once recognised the ill-formed scrawls which
emanated from the untutored pen of Mistress Peyton. It was addressed in
that same illiterate but deeply loved hand to Mister Rupert Kestyon,
erstwhile my lord of Stowmaries, and began:

  "_Honord Sir._

  "This is to warn you that the villan Daniel Pye hath
  informed against you, he did make brag of it befor my
  servants to-day saying that you will be arrested for treson
  and he be thus revenged upon me. i think it were best you
  did not com to my house until this clowd has clered away.
  But i am yr frend always."

The lady had signed the missive with her name in full. The hot blood
rushed to Rupert Kestyon's face, for despite his own natural vanity
he could not help but see the callous indifference as to his own fate
which pierced through the fair Julia's carefully-worded warning.

Without a word, however, he folded the letter and slipped it into the
inner pocket of his coat. Then he turned once more to his cousin.

"Is there no other way?" he asked, whilst the weakness of his nature,
the vacillation peculiar to his character, was very apparent now, in
the ever-shifting expression of his face, the pains he took to avoid
looking Michael quite square in the face.

"I see none now," rejoined the other. "Methinks, Coz, that you have
received confirmation of what I told you."

"Yes. I have. Unless I leave the country to-day I shall be a prisoner
ere nightfall."

"And Rose Marie, beyond all that we have made her suffer already, will
be left to mourn for you. To torture a woman then leave her desolate!
Nay, man, the shame of that were worse than a traitor's death."

"When shall I see her?"

"Anon, I think. Master Legros is on his way to you."

"Then I'll to France to-day, taking my wife with me," said Rupert
resolutely, "and may God guard you, Cousin."

"Nay, we'll not ask Him to do that just now," rejoined the other
with the same quaint smile; "rather may He protect her, and give her
happiness. We both owe her that, methinks."

Thus was the compact sealed. It had of course been a foregone
conclusion all along, and Michael had never for a moment anticipated
that his cousin would refuse the sacrifice.

The great game begun a year ago across the supper table of a tavern and
in the midst of a drunken orgy, ended here and now. Both the gamblers
lost all that they had staked. One was losing his self-respect, the
woman he loved with a capricious passion, the freedom which he had
coveted; the other was throwing away his all so that a fair-haired
girl, the cold ice-maid who had no love for him, should still be the
only winner in the end.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX

             Are the skies wet because we weep,
             Or fair because of any mirth?
             Cry out; they are gods; perchance they sleep!
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


Rupert Kestyon--erstwhile styled my lord of Stowmaries and
Rivaulx--turned away from his house in Piccadilly with a comparatively
light heart.

Comparatively only, because strive as he might he could not altogether
banish from his mind the last picture he had of his cousin, standing
all alone in the gloomy withdrawing room, tall, erect, perfectly
cheerful and placid, just as if he were awaiting a summons to some
festivity rather than to disgrace and to death.

"It is best that I should remain here pending the execution of the
magistrate's warrant," Michael had explained simply. "It will then
be done without confusion of identity or difficulties of any kind.
The informer will probably not see me until I am on my trial, and, in
any case, I imagine that he will be just as content to tell his lies
against me as he would against you."

Rupert, of a truth, did marvel not a little at his cousin's coolness
at such a moment; he himself felt a tingling of all his nerves and his
faculties seemed all numb in face of this terrible crisis through which
he was passing. He could not really imagine that any man could thus
calmly discuss the details of his own coming dishonour, of the awful
public disgrace, the physical and mental agony of a coming trial and
of ignominious death. Yet Michael was quite serene, even cheerful, and
ever and anon a whimsical smile played round the corners of his lips
when he caught the look of shame, of perturbation and renewed hesitancy
in the younger man's face.

He himself was ever wont to decide quickly for good or ill, to map his
course of action and never to deviate from it. Many there were who knew
Michael Kestyon well, and who declared that he had no conscience, no
real sense of what was right or wrong. That may be so. Certain it is
that whatever part in life he chose to play, he never paused to think
whether morally it was right or wrong that he should play it.

Even now he did not pause to think whether what he was doing was
sublime or infamous. He gave his honour, his name and his life not
in order to right a wrong, not in order to atone for a sin which he
himself had committed, but because his love for Rose Marie transcended
every other feeling within him, overshadowed every thought. She had
told him that her happiness lay there where duty and loyalty called.
He--poor fool!--imagined that she loved Rupert, her husband, from a
sense of duty mayhap, but loved him nevertheless.

With an accusation of conspiracy threatening that man, an accusation
which could only find its complement in a traitor's death, Rose
Marie could not be aught but unhappy. So thought Michael to himself,
whereupon the giving of name, of honour and of life to the man whom
Rose Marie loved, was as natural to Michael as to draw his breath.

The fact that this sacrifice meant dishonour and shame was no pang.
Michael cared less than naught for public opinion. To himself he
would not stand disgraced. He had weighed his action, looked at it
from every point; had in his mind's eye seen the public trial, the
ignominious condemnation, all the disgrace which pertains to such a
death. He had seen it, and decided without the slightest hesitation.

All this Rupert could not of course understand. In this he was
different to Michael, that he felt poignant remorse for his own action,
the while he had really not the moral power to reverse his decision.
Had the acceptance of another man's heroic sacrifice to be done again,
he again would have accepted it, and again have bitterly repented,
hesitated, repented and accepted again. He would have understood
Michael's attitude better if there were any prospect of an admiring
world knowing subsequently the truth of the sacrifice, of there being a
chance of the public recognition of the heroism, even after death. But
here there was no such prospect. For Michael it would be humiliation,
and nothing but humiliation, shame and disgrace even beyond the grave.

Therefore, the young man was over-glad when--the preparations for his
journey being all complete--he at last turned his back on the old house
in Piccadilly. All the servants had been enjoined that if any one came
thither and asked for my lord of Stowmaries the new and only real lord
of Stowmaries would receive the visitor, whatever his errand might be.
Then Rupert took his leave of his cousin; not a word more was said on
the subject of the future, nor did the young man attempt to express any
gratitude. I do not think that he felt any in the true sense of the
word, and Michael's attitude was not one that called forth any outward
show of sentiment. An hour later Rupert Kestyon had finally turned his
steps in the direction of Fleet Street; soon he found himself inside
the yard of the Bell Inn, asking if he might have speech with Master
Legros of Paris, lately come to the hostelry.

There was something almost comical in good Papa Legros' expression
of surprise when he realised who his visitor was. Rupert's face was
of course unfamiliar to him, and it took him quite a little time
to collect his thoughts, in view of the happy prospect which this
unexpected visit had called forth before him.

His kindly heart, ever prone to see good, even where none existed,
quickly attributed to this erring sinner the saving clause of loyal
repentance. Knowing nothing of what had occurred between the cousins,
Papa Legros naturally sprang to the conclusion that the young man,
tardily smitten with remorse, had come of his own accord to make
reparation, and the worthy tailor was only too ready to smooth the path
of atonement for him as much as lay in his power.

"Milor," he began, as soon as he understood who Rupert was, and
stretching out a cordial hand to him.

"Nay! I am no longer milor now," broke in Rupert Kestyon with a slight
show of petulance. "My Cousin Michael is Lord of Stowmaries now. I am
only a poor suppliant of high birth and low fortunes who would humbly
ask if your daughter--my wife before God--is still prepared to link her
fate to mine."

"My daughter, milor--sir--will answer herself," rejoined the tailor
with at least as much dignity as a high-born gentleman would have
displayed under the like circumstances; then he went to the door, and
opening it called to Rose Marie.

Rupert Kestyon, despite the deep-rooted antagonism which he felt
against this woman to whom now his future was irrevocably bound, was
forced to own to himself that Fate tempered her stern decrees with a
goodly amount of compensation.

Rose Marie's beauty was one which sorrow doth not mar; in her case
it had even enhanced it, by etherealising the childlike contour of
the face, and giving the liquid blue eyes an expression such as the
mediæval artists of old lent to the saints whom they portrayed. She
came forward with quiet self-possession, through which shone an air
of simple confidence and of sublime forgiveness. Though she had not
expected Rupert's coming, yet she showed no surprise, only pleasure
that he had so nobly forestalled her, and saved her the humiliation of
coming to him as a suppliant.

Rupert Kestyon was young, and his senses were quickly enflamed at sight
of so much loveliness, and though inwardly he railed at chance, that
had not made of this exquisite woman a great lady, yet when she so
graciously extended her hand to him, he kissed it as deferentially as
he would that of a duchess.

"Madam," he said, as soon as she was seated, and he standing before
her, "we are told in the Scriptures that there is more joy in Heaven
for the conversion of one sinner than for the continued goodness of one
hundred holy men. It had always struck me ere this that this dictum was
somewhat unfair on the holy men, but now I have come to be thankful for
this disposition of Heaven's rejoicings, since you--who no doubt have
come straight from there--will mayhap show some consideration to the
repentant sinner who hath so miserably wronged you, and who now craves
humbly for pardon at your feet."

He was very much pleased with himself for this speech, accompanied as
it was with pretence of bending the knee. He felt sure that Michael
would be pleased with him for it, nor did it cost him much to make it,
for of a truth Rose Marie was exquisitely beautiful.

"By Gad," he murmured to himself, "meseems that I am ready to fall in
love with the wench."

"My lord," she said quietly, meeting with perfect impassiveness the
sudden gleam of admiration which lit up his eyes, "'tis not for
me--your wife--to judge you or your conduct. The wrong which you did to
me, I do readily forgive, so be it that my father and mother, whom you
have wronged as deeply as you did mine own self, are equally ready to
forget all that is past."

"An my lord is willing to make amends," said Papa Legros with an
involuntary sigh. He thought of Michael and how different he had looked
when first he had wooed Rose Marie; Michael with the handsome proud
head, the merry smile, the twinkling dark eyes so full of fun at times,
at others so earnest and so infinitely tender. Papa Legros sighed, even
as he felt that rectitude was a hard taskmistress, and that 'twas a
vast pity Rose Marie was quite such an angel of goodness. But Rupert's
impatient voice broke in on these thoughts.

"I pray you," he said, "do not persist in calling me my lord. My
Cousin Michael is and has always been, it seems, the rightful Lord of
Stowmaries. I am a poor man, now--"

"And my father, sir, is rich enough that your poverty need not fret
you," said Rose Marie quietly. "An you'll have me as your wife--"

"It is my duty as well as my pleasure, Madam," he broke in decisively,
"to ask you if you'll permit me to lay my submission at your feet."

"You have but to command me, sir," she rejoined coldly.

"An unfortunate incident, of which I understand you have some inkling,
will force me to leave England for a time."

"We know that a false charge has been preferred against you, sir, and
we came to England--I trust not too late--to warn you of your danger."

"Nay, not too late, Madam; as you see I am still free. I had warnings
from other quarters yet am equally grateful for your pains."

"The cloud will blow over," she said stiffly. "When do you propose to
go to France?"

"To-night an it please you, Madam," he replied. "Will you journey in my
company?"

"If you so desire it, sir."

She rose, and with the same calm dignity prepared to go. Rupert's
glowing eyes followed her graceful movements and dwelt with unconcealed
pleasure on every line of her young figure, which the somewhat stiff
mode of the day could not altogether disguise. A warm tinge of colour
flew to her cheeks when, raising her eyes to his for a moment, she
encountered his bold look; then when the colour flew as swiftly as it
came she looked pale and frail as the snowdrops to which Michael had
ever loved to compare her.

But beyond that quick blush, she showed no sign of emotion. Her
almost mediæval sense of duty to her husband caused her to accept his
every word, his every look, without a thought of censure or even of
rebellion. She had so schooled her sensibilities that they were her
slaves, she their absolute mistress--the rigid and mechanical being
come into existence from out the ashes of her past happy self in order
to right the great wrong committed by another.

Obedient to her lord's mute but peremptory request, she gave him her
hand, and accepted his kiss as she would have done his scorn, coldly
and humbly, for her father stood there and watched her, and she would
not let him see what this interview was costing her in agony of mind,
in humiliation of her entire soul. For, look you, when she left Paris
in order to offer herself a willing sacrifice on the altar of filial
love, she had steeled her pride against her husband's scorn, but not
against his capricious passion, and now that his boldly admiring glance
swept over her face and form, she felt a wild, mad longing to flee--to
hide her sorrow which had suddenly turned to shame, and to put the
whole world between herself and the pollution of her husband's kiss.

Her father's voice recalled her to herself, and even Rupert Kestyon
had not noted the swiftly-flying look of agony which had momentarily
darkened her eyes.

"Sir," said Papa Legros now, with firmer decision than he had hitherto
displayed, "you see that both my daughter and myself are over-ready
to forget the past. You are young, sir, and methinks sinned more from
thoughtlessness than from any love of evil. Rose Marie is ready to
follow you, withersoever you may command. She is your wife before God,
and directly we are in Paris we will ask His blessing in confirmation
of your union. Monseigneur will not refuse to perform the ceremony--the
other, alas, whereat a miscreant held my daughter's hand, was but a
mockery--Monseigneur will pass it over. 'Twas he advised me to make a
final appeal to your honour, and I thank God on my knees, sir, that
with you rests the glory of having made such noble amends entirely
of your own accord. I pray you only--and herein you must forgive a
father's anxiety--I pray you to place in my hands the final pledge of
your good faith towards my daughter."

"What may that be, sirrah?" quoth Rupert, whilst the first show of
arrogance suddenly pierced through his borrowed armour of outward
deference.

"The decree of His Holiness the Pope," rejoined the tailor quietly,
"annulling your marriage with my daughter. An you mean loyally by her
you will place the mandate in my hands."

For a second or two only Rupert seemed to hesitate. This simple giving
over of a paper meant the final surrender of his will, the giving up
of all for which he had planned and intrigued; the acknowledgment
that Fate was stronger than his desire, God's decree greater than the
schemes of men. That mandate once out of his hands, he could never get
it back again, nor ever obtain another. It was real, tangible finality;
therefore did he hesitate, but the next moment he had looked once
more on Rose Marie, and the natural primitive man in him, the shallow
nature, the masterful senses, caused him to shrug his shoulders in
indifference. Bah, one woman after all was as good as another; this one
loved him in her curious, cold way, and---by Gad!--she was d--d pretty.
So Rupert Kestyon delved in the deep pocket of his surcoat and drew out
therefrom a parchment to which was appended an enormous seal that bore
the arms and triple crown of His Holiness the Pope.

This he handed to Papa Legros.

The latter took it and glanced at its contents; one phrase therein
caused a dark frown to appear on his brow, and a flash of anger to
rush to his cheeks. It related to the misconduct of Rose Marie, the
daughter of one Armand Legros, master tailor of Paris, in consequence
of which His Holiness did grant dispensation to Rupert Kestyon, Earl
of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, to contract a marriage with another woman,
his former marriage being null and void.

For a brief moment good Papa Legros hated the young reprobate before
him with all the strength of which his kind heart was capable; for a
moment he longed to throw that lying parchment back into the teeth of
the miscreant who had dared to put an insult on record against the
purest saint that had ever adorned her sex. The good man's hands shook
as they held the paper, and during that brief moment Rupert experienced
a hideous sensation of fear. If Rose Marie rejected him now, would
Michael withdraw from the sacrifice which he was prepared to make?

But that anxiety was short-lived. With a deep sigh of resignation, and
a firm compression of the lips, Master Legros looked the young man
straight in the face.

"What is past, is past," he said, as if in answer to the other's
thought, "and I am satisfied."

But he did not tear the parchment up, as Rupert had at first thought
that he meant to do. He folded it up with hands still slightly shaking
from the inward struggle which had just taken place within his simple
soul, and then slipped it into the breast pocket of his coat.




                              CHAPTER XL

                So many worlds, so much to do,
                So little done, such things to be,
                How know I what had need of thee,
                For thou wert strong as thou wert true?
                                                      --TENNYSON.


It was later in the afternoon and Master Legros and his daughter had
finished their preparations for the return journey. Strangely enough,
papa's heart was not as glad as it should have been, considering that
the object of his visit to England had been attained, and that he
had reached the pinnacle of his desire much more easily than he had
ever dared to contemplate, for he had reached it without the cost of
humiliation to his child or rebuff to himself.

Nevertheless, the kindly heart was like a dead weight in the good man's
breast, even though Rose Marie did her best to seem cheerful, talking
ever of the joy of seeing maman again, and at times quite serenely of
her own future.

"Thy husband looks kind, Rose Marie," said papa tentatively, whilst his
eyes, rendered keen through the intensity of his affection, strove to
pierce through the mask of impassiveness wherewith his child tried to
hide her thoughts.

"He also seems greatly to admire thee," he added with an involuntary
display of paternal pride.

But has any man--has even the most devoted of fathers--ever succeeded
in reading a woman's thoughts on the subject of another man.

All that Papa Legros thought at this moment was that Rose Marie looked
very pale and that a shiver seemed to go through her as if she had the
ague. Mayhap she was over-tired, certainly she was unstrung. He himself
felt uncommonly as if he would like to cry.

In the early part of the afternoon he persuaded Rose Marie to lie
awhile on her bed and rest. "Milor"--for so he still persisted in
calling Rupert Kestyon in his mind--would be here at six o'clock; his
coach would then be ready for the journey to Dover. It was now little
more than three.

Rose Marie obeyed willingly. She was very tired and she longed to be
all alone. Papa declared his intention of going out for a walk and of
returning within an hour.

A great longing had seized him to see Michael once again. The worthy
man cursed himself for his folly and for his weakness but he felt
that he could not go away from England without grasping once more
that slender, kindly hand, which he once used to look on as that of a
dearly-loved son.

Papa Legros did not see the reason why--now that all difficulties had
been duly planed--he and Michael should not remain friends. He had more
than a vague suspicion, too, that "milor's" repentant attitude was due
to Michael's persuasion.

Asking his way from the passers-by as he went, he soon found himself
once again before the house in Soho. But his disappointment was bitter
when he heard that my lord was from home, and no one knew when he would
return.

Sadder of heart then, Master Legros retraced his steps towards the
Bell Inn. On the way he had wiped many a tear which had fallen down
his cheeks, blaming himself severely the while for this display of
weakness. But--strange though it may seem--this failure in seeing
Michael and in hearing his cheery voice speak the "God-speed" had
weighed the good tailor's spirits down with an oppressive weight which
seemed almost like a foreboding.

In the yard of the inn, Master Legros encountered quite a crowd of
gaffers. Some great excitement seemed to be in the air; they talked
volubly to one another, with that stolid absence of gesture, that
burying of hands in breeches pockets which always makes an Englishman's
excitement seem so unconvincing to the foreign observer. In the centre
of the yard, a heavy coach--a note of bright canary yellow in the midst
of all the sober greys and drabs around--stood ready, with ostlers at
the leaders' heads, the horses champing their bits and impatiently
pawing the cobblestones. The driver, with thick coat unbuttoned
displaying an expanse of grey woolen shirt, was quenching his thirst
inside the vehicle; obviously it was not his intention to join actively
in the babel of voices which went on all round him, although the coach
itself and the horses seemed special objects of curiosity, since a
crowd of gaffers surrounded it as closely as the impatient horses
themselves would allow.

Master Legros made his way through the crowd, trying to catch a chance
phrase or so, which might give him the keynote to all this unwonted
bustle. The words "Papist" and "arrest," which he understood, caught
his ear repeatedly, also the name "Stowmaries," invariably accompanied
with a loud imprecation.

Feeling naturally diffident through his want of knowledge of the
language, he was somewhat timorous of asking questions, but hurried up
to his room, having bidden the barman downstairs take a bottle of wine
and two glasses up to his room.

He found Rose Marie sitting quietly in the armchair, pensive but
otherwise serene. To the father's anxious eyes it seemed as if she
had been crying, but she returned his kiss of greeting with clinging
fondness, and assured him that she felt quite rested and ready for the
journey.

"My lord" had arranged that his coach should take them by night journey
to Dover, and thence immediately to Calais if the packet-boat was
plying; for "my lord" seemed in a vast hurry to get across to France as
soon as may be, and Rose Marie herself was conscious of a great longing
to put the sea between herself and this land which called forth so many
bitter memories.

When the serving-man brought the wine, Legros asked his daughter to
question him as to the excitement which reigned in the yard.

"Oh!" explained the man, who was eager enough to talk, "'tis only
the news of the arrest of another of these d--d Papists. They do
conspire, you know, to murder the king, and it seems that this time
they've arrested another noble lord, no less a person than my lord of
Stowmaries."

"My lord of Stowmaries!" ejaculated Legros in utter dismay, for he had
partly guessed, partly understood, what the man was saying; "surely it
cannot be--"

"When and where did this occur?" queried Rose Marie peremptorily.

"About an hour ago, at his lordship's house in Piccadilly," replied the
man. "They do say that the miscreant hath confessed, directly he saw
the musketeers. He was scared, no doubt, and blurted out the truth.
By the Lord! If the people of England had their way, a man like that
should be broken on the wheel and the fires of Smithfield should be
revived to rid the country of such pestilential vermin."

Fortunately Master Legros did not understand all that the man said,
else his wrath had known no bounds. As it was he had only a vague idea
that the man was being insolent, and he shouted an angry command of:

"Enough of this! Get out, sirrah!" which the man readily obeyed, being
over-satisfied that he had annoyed and even frightened these foreign
Papists, who, no doubt, had come to England only to brew mischief.

Directly the door had closed behind the serving-man, Rose Marie said
decisively:

"Father dear, we must to my husband's house at once, and find out what
has happened."

"He seemed to make so light of the danger which threatened him, when
he was here just now, that I had begun to think that blackguard Daniel
Pye was naught but a clumsy blackmailer. And yet, milor--I--I mean our
milor--he thought the matter grave, and went forth very hurriedly to
warn his kinsman."

"Father dear, I would give anything to have further news," said Rose
Marie, who was trembling with agitation. "Do, I pray you, let us go
forth and try and find out something more."

But even as with feverish movements, she began putting on a cloak and
hood, the door opened and Rupert Kestyon entered. Rose Marie stared at
him as if she had seen a ghost, and Master Legros murmured in complete
bewilderment:

"You--you, my lord--then, thank God!--it is not true."

"What is not true?" queried the young man, who also seemed labouring
under grave agitation, for his cheeks were almost grey in colour, and
his lips twitched painfully as he tried to control the tremor of his
voice.

"That you have been arrested, my lord!" said Legros. "They told us that
you had been arrested for treason and--"

"They told you lies, no doubt," broke in Rupert roughly, "as you see I
am safe and sound. The horses are put to," he added with obvious want
of control over his own impatience. "I pray you, Madam, to descend as
soon as you are ready, and you, too, good Master, and to enter the
coach without parleying with the crowd. You need have no fear; they
will not molest you."

"We are ready, milor--I mean sir," said Papa Legros, who was taken with
an exceptionally severe attack of his usual fussiness. "I pray you give
your arm to my daughter--I will follow close on your heels."

"My lord," it seems, was so agitated that he even forgot his good
manners, and curtly bidding the others not to linger, he darted out of
the room, and had even disappeared down the corridor before Rose Marie
had had time to collect her little bits of hand luggage.

She went back to the window which gave on the covered balcony that
on this floor ran all round the house, overlooking the yard. The
excitement down below was evidently reaching fever pitch; every one was
rushing toward the gate and the yard itself was for the moment left
deserted. Only one ostler remained at the horses' heads, and his head,
too, was turned in the direction of the gates. The driver had emerged
from the depths of the vehicle and together with his mate was hoisting
the Legros' luggage into the boot. He, too, however, craned his neck
from time to time, trying to see beyond the dense knot of human heads
which totally obstructed both the view and the passage out into Fleet
Street.

Rose Marie, feeling still strangely perturbed, her heart beating
with a nameless fear, which she could not herself understand, threw
open the window and stepped out onto the balcony. Rupert Kestyon was
standing just below, giving impatient directions to his men anent the
disposition of the luggage. The sound of the opening window and of Rose
Marie's footsteps above, caused him to look up and at sight of her he
uttered a loud oath. It was evident that he had completely lost all
control over himself.

"You have run it too late, d--n you!" he shouted roughly. "Now we
cannot get through Fleet Street till after that accursed mob hath
dispersed."

Rose Marie with lips compressed and brows closely puckered withdrew
out of his sight, blushing with shame at the thought that a group of
serving-girls who stood also on the balcony not far from her, giggling
and chattering, should have heard her husband's rough words.

But the wenches were evidently too much engrossed with their desire to
see something of what was going on beyond the hostelry gates to pay
much heed to the pale, foreign miss and to her doings, and even as Rose
Marie prepared once more to join her father, she heard one girl say
excitedly:

"He won't be passing by for another few minutes--we'll have time to run
to the gates--"

"No! no! Cannot you hear the shouts? They are bringing him along now,"
cried another, holding with both hands to the iron railing, the while
her companion tried to drag her away.

"I can just see over the heads of the crowd," said another. "Here they
come! Here they come! Can you hear them all hooting?"

And she herself indulged in a vicious "Boo! Down with the traitor! Down
with the Papists!"

Beyond the gates, the crowd, invisible to Rose Marie, was evidently
giving vent to its excitement. As the wench had said, they were hooting
lustily. Shouts of "Death to the traitors!" mingled with obvious cries
of terror and of pain following immediately on the clatter of horses'
hoofs on the mud-covered street.

"It's a closed vehicle!" said one of the girls on the balcony in
obvious disappointment.

"And you can't see even that with all that pack of soldiery."

"Boo! Boo! Death to the Papist!" screamed the other girls in unison.

Just for a moment then in the small space between the top of the
archway, and above the heads of the crowd, Rose Marie caught sight of
a closed hackney coach, being driven at slow pace and surrounded by
an escort of musketeers. The hooting, hissing, and other expressions
of hatred and opprobrium became almost deafening for the moment, and
through the shouts of "The rope, the rack, the stake for the Papists!"
could distinctly be heard the name, "Stowmaries!" accompanied by loud
imprecations, whilst a shower of evil-smelling refuse was hurled at the
vehicle by the enthusiastic staff of the Bell Inn, congregated at its
gates.

Rose Marie felt sick with horror. Gradually that fear which had
hitherto been nameless, gained more tangible shape. She peeped down
again and saw that her husband had taken refuge inside his coach.

Then she understood.

It was Michael who had been arrested--the only Lord of Stowmaries, as
he himself had proudly said awhile ago.

Did some inkling of the real truth of the case rise in her heart then
and there, it were difficult to say. There is a strange telepathy
which exists in nature and which warns the sensitive mind of the
danger, the misfortune of another being. It was only a purely natural,
human instinct which prompted her to ask the serving-wenches a final
question, the answer to which she knew already.

"What is all the excitement about?" she asked, turning to the group of
girls and steadying her voice as much as she could. "Who is it they are
taking past in that closed carriage?"

"My lord of Stowmaries, Mistress," said one of the girls. "He is one of
the Papists that do conspire against the king. He'll hang for sure--I
wish they'd burn the lot as they did in the olden days."

"But 'tis my lord Stowmaries' coach that is standing here below," said
Rose Marie; "he is safe and sound within."

"Nay! I know naught about that," quoth the girl decisively; "'tis my
lord Stowmaries they are taking to prison sure enough, and 'twill be my
lord of Stowmaries' head that'll be on Tyburn gate before many days are
over, and I for one'll go to see him beheaded, if I can get a holiday
on that day."




                              CHAPTER XLI

                    In the silence of the night,
                    How we shiver with affright
                At the melancholy menace of their tone!
                    For every sound that floats
                From the rust within their throats
                    Is a groan.
                                               --EDGAR ALLAN POE.


Rose Marie had told her father all that she feared, all that she, alas,
knew to be true.

"We cannot go now, Father dear," she said with quivering voice, whilst
her eyes burning with hot tears, looked down appealingly at her father,
"we must surely hear what becomes of him."

"Nay, my child," said Papa Legros with a heavy sigh, "what can we do by
remaining here? Your duty is to your husband. No doubt he, too, fears
for his life, and would wish to leave this country ere suspicion fall
upon him."

"But Father, methinks you do not understand. I know not if there
hath been conspiracy or not, but this I do know, that the charge was
preferred against my husband. Then why is my lord arrested?"

"I know not, my jewel," replied Papa Legros, deeply perplexed and
miserable. "England seems to be a queer country just now. Mayhap all
these gentlemen do conspire. God knows there always have been many
conspiracies against our own most high and most Catholic King Louis,
the ever victorious."

And Master Legros doffed his felt hat in token of deep respect.

"Thy husband waits, child," added the worthy man resignedly; "'tis him
thou must obey."

Even as he spoke, Rupert's steps were heard once more along the
corridor. He entered, still looking miserably anxious, but at sight of
Rose Marie a blush of shame-facedness overspread his pale cheeks.

"Your pardon, Mistress," he said, striving to speak quietly, "methinks
the coast is clear now. Will you deign to descend?"

He offered Rose Marie his arm. She felt like some wild creature
trapped, looking round her with wild, terrified eyes as if for a means
of escape. Her father gave her an appealing look, and Rupert reiterated
his request with more distinct command in his tone. His eyes, wherein
wrath, fear, and a certain look of shame were obviously fighting for
mastery, seemed to dare her to disobey. He was her master after all,
and a master of her own choosing. The bars of that cage against which
she would henceforth for ever bruise her heart were fashioned by her
own hands.

"Come, Mistress, I wait," said Rupert, and with a gesture which was
almost rough in its peremptoriness, he took her hand and slipped it
under his arm.

Papa Legros gathered the sundry small bags and parcels which formed his
own and his daughter's hand luggage, and then he followed the young
couple out of the room.

But Rose Marie once across the threshold and in the corridor soon
disengaged her arm. This masterful appropriation of her person and
of her will caused her an instinctive pang of fear. Good God! Was
she going to hate this man whom through an impulse of loyalty and
righteousness she had openly acknowledged as her lord, and to whom
she almost wilfully had surrendered her whole young life, her hopes
of happiness, her every thought and wish? Now with every look of
unfettered admiration, with every word of command, he roused her numbed
spirits into rebellion. Even now she could not bear to take his arm,
she could not bear the touch of his hand on hers as he began to lead
her along the corridor, as if already she were part of his goods and
chattels, the obedient servant of his caprice.

When she withdrew her hand from his, he looked inquiringly on her
face, then realising her motive, guessing her repugnance, he laughed a
forced, ironical laugh and said with obvious intent to wound:

"Nay, Madam! I'm vastly sorry that even in this dark passage you cannot
fancy that I am my cousin Michael. But you made your choice yourself
'twixt him and me, and therefore pray understand that 'tis too late to
repent."

He walked, however, on ahead, keeping a little in front of her, and
soon reached the door which gave on the yard.

His coach stood there all in readiness, the driver on the box holding
the ribbons, the groom standing by the carriage holding open the door.
But between the coach and the door through which Rupert with Rose Marie
and Papa Legros had just stepped forth into the yard, there stood a
group composed of three musketeers, one of whom was a little in advance
of the others, and apparently in command.

Master Savage, landlord of the Bell Inn, was in close and voluble
converse with the soldier, as Rupert with a peremptory voice called to
his own driver to pull up a little closer.

At the sound, Master Savage turned, and the musketeer now came up to
the little party in the door.

"Which of you two gentlemen," he said, looking from Rupert Kestyon to
Master Legros, "is Master Legros, tailor-in-chief to His Majesty the
King of France?"

Papa Legros, hearing his name thus mentioned, instinctively stepped
forward, more fussy than ever, poor man, wondering indeed if some fresh
misfortune was not coming his way. Rupert, pale to the lips, stood
mutely staring at the musketeer.

"By order of His Majesty the King!" resumed the soldier now addressing
Legros, and presenting a paper to him, which the worthy tailor,
hopelessly bewildered and not a little frightened, now took from him.

"My orders are to intimate to Master Legros, tailor-in-chief to His
Majesty the King of France, that he is not to leave his present place
of abode without express permission from the Lord Chief Justice of
England."

"Qu'est ce qu'il dit?" queried Papa Legros, turning helplessly toward
his daughter.

"That we may not leave England just now," she said, feeling not a
little bewildered, too, for this was so unexpected. "Let me see that
paper, Father dear."

Rupert, whom this incident had thrown into a well-nigh unbearable state
of fear, had kept silent all this while, longing yet not daring to
question the officer closer. But the latter seemed in no way concerned
with him, his errand was apparently solely confined to these peremptory
orders to Master Legros.

Rose Marie read the paper through, then she looked inquiringly on
Rupert.

"What are we to do, sir," she asked coldly.

"You have no option," he said, as he took hold of her wrist and quietly
drew her back under the shadow of the doorway.

"There is no doubt," he continued in an agitated whisper, "that if
your father attempts to disobey the order, he would be stopped more
forcibly, and his situation would then become more uncomfortable. Does
this paper state on what grounds your father is thus forbidden to go
away?"

"Yes," she replied calmly; "it says that by order of the king, Master
Legros, tailor of Paris, is required to give evidence on behalf of the
Crown in the forthcoming trial of the Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx,
for conspiracy and treason."

"He is summoned as a witness. He has no option--he must stay--they
would stop him if he attempted to go," reiterated Rupert Kestyon, whose
trembling voice scarce contrived to pass from his dry throat through
his parched lips.

"Then with your permission," she rejoined, "I will stay with my father."

"As you please," he said hurriedly.

Rose Marie bent her head in token of farewell. She felt more like a
puppet moving and acting mechanically than like a sentient woman.
She suffered such an agony of mind and heart at thought of what had
occurred, what she visualized and what she guessed, that the mere act
of speaking and of moving seemed no part of her present existence.
She was called upon to act and to decide for herself and for her
father--but as Rupert Kestyon very properly said, there was no option.
Nor had Rose Marie anything to fear for her father; it was difficult
for her to imagine how the present situation had come about, and why
the King of England should desire Master Legros to be a witness for the
Crown against the Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, accused of conspiracy
and treason, nor did she quite understand what being a witness
for the Crown really meant, but for her own part she was conscious
of an intense sense of relief when she saw Rupert Kestyon--her
husband--turning on his heel, and without looking either to right or
left, making his way somewhat hurriedly to his coach.

She went back to her father's side, and taking his arm in order to
assure him that all was well, she turned to the musketeer.

"Sir," she said to him, "are there any further orders which you have to
transmit to my father?"

"No, Mistress, none," replied the soldier. "Your father must understand
that he is free to come and go as he pleases, so long as he remains in
the city. Strong measures would only be taken if he attempted to go."

"My father understands all that, sir," she said with a haughty little
toss of the head; "though we are strangers, we respect the laws of
your country just as we in France would expect you to respect ours.
My father understands the order as set forth in this paper, and he
will not leave this city until His Majesty the King of England hath no
longer any need of his services. Come, Father dear," she whispered, in
her own mother tongue and with gentle pressure trying to lead the good
man away, "I will explain everything to you when we are alone."

"But thy husband, child!" urged Papa Legros, whose bewilderment had
reached its veriest climax. "Thy husband!"

Without giving direct reply, Rose Marie pointed to the coach, just
ahead of them both, in the middle of the yard. Papa Legros, following
his daughter's glance, saw Rupert Kestyon in the act of stepping into
the carriage, and the groom closing the door in after him.

"He goes to France without us, Father dear," she said simply.

And for the first time for many days now, a real smile lit up the
girl's eyes, and chased away the miserable, haggard look from her young
face.

She bowed graciously to the musketeer officer, who saluted her with
utmost deference. Then she led her father away. The soldier's eyes
followed her graceful form with undisguised admiration. At the door she
turned back and gave him a final little bow of farewell.

For Rose Marie in the midst of her great sorrow and of her agonizing
fear, looked on that young musketeer as a deliverer and was grateful to
him, too, for the good news which he had brought.




                             CHAPTER XLII

                 This year knows nothing of last year
                 To-morrow has no more to say
                 To yesterday.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


That same afternoon, and at about the same time as Rupert Kestyon's
coach swung out of the gates of the Bell yard, Sir John Ayloffe
presented himself at his kinswoman's house in Holborn Row.

He had come in answer to an urgent and peremptory summons, and had made
all haste, seeing that he had just heard the news that it was Michael
Kestyon who had been arrested for treason, and not the fair Julia's
erstwhile faithful adorer, Rupert. Visions of that exceedingly pleasant
£12,000 which he had thought were lost to him for ever when Michael
obtained the peerage of Stowmaries, once more rose before his mind's
eye, surrounded with the golden halo of anticipatory hope.

Of a truth, if Michael was condemned and executed for treason--and
there was but little doubt of that, taking the temper of Parliament and
people on the subject of the hellish Popish plots--then young Rupert
would come into his own again very quickly and there was no reason why
the pleasing scheme of the fair Julia's marriage with her faithful
admirer should not reach success after all.

To Cousin John's supreme astonishment, however, instead of finding
his beautiful cousin in gleeful excitement at the good news, he saw
her lying on a sofa in her tiny boudoir with her fair head buried in
billows of lace cushions, and on the verge of hysterics.

She was clutching a letter in her hand, and when Cousin John approached
her, with that diffidence peculiar to the male creature in face of
feminine tears, she held out the paper mutely towards him.

It was a letter signed Rupert Kestyon. Cousin John quickly ran his
eye over its contents. In flowery and elegant language and with many
reproaches directed at the cruel beauty who that very morning had
struck him to the heart at a moment when she believed him to be in the
most dire distress, the writer explained that Fate would now part him
from his beautiful Julia for ever:

"I go to France this night," he added, "with the wife whom God gave me
eighteen years ago, and to whom I now see that 'tis my duty to cleave.
You, I feel, did never love me, else you had not sent me that cruel
message this morning."

He was his Julia's adoring and ever-faithful servant, but there was no
mistaking the tone of the letter: he was leaving her for good and all.

Silently Cousin John folded up the letter and handed it back to his
cousin. There was nothing more to be said. He could only console and
even in this he was unsuccessful, for his own heart was heavy at
thought of that £12,000 which now could never be his.

Mistress Peyton had by the selfishness of her own ambition allowed
the trump card in the great gamble of life to slip through her dainty
fingers. The incident was closed; the tailor's wench had won the stakes
in the end.

No wonder that Julia fell into hysterics; indeed, indeed, Fate's irony
had been over-cruel. It seemed as if every one of her schemes turned
wantonly to a weapon against her most cherished desires.

Cousin John was vastly puzzled. He could not understand what had
induced Rupert to make amends to the wife in order to repudiate whom he
had spent a fortune, and lost his all. But when, anon, he heard through
public news-criers that Michael had confessed to the charge preferred
against him, and when his keen mind began to think over in detail the
various events in connection with the arrest, he arrived at a pretty
shrewd guess as to what had occurred between the cousins. Remembering
the incidents of that memorable evening at St. Denis and Michael's
offer to Stowmaries then, he bethought himself that men who are great
blackguards are capable of strange things when they love a woman.
Whereupon good Sir John shook his head and ceased his wanderings in the
realms of conjecture, for he had come across a psychological problem
which passed his understanding.




                             CHAPTER XLIII

                  Certes his mouth is wried and black
                  Full little pence be in his sack,
                  This devil hath him by the back
                  It is no boot to lie.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


Daniel Pye on that selfsame memorable day was literally floating in a
blissful atmosphere of delight.

My lord of Stowmaries had not only been arrested but he had confessed
to his guilt; a matter which at first had greatly surprised Master Pye,
who had been at great pains to concoct an elaborate lie, only to find
through some mysterious accident of Fortune, he must have hit upon the
truth.

Of course he did not realise as yet that the man who had been arrested
and who had confessed was not the former suitor for Mistress Peyton's
hand. He had only heard some pleasant rumours anent the reward which he
would get as soon as conviction was obtained against the accused. Many
spoke of fifty pounds, others that his reward would be as great as that
given to Master Oates: a substantial pension and comfortable lodgings
in one of the king's houses.

But the thought of Mistress Peyton's miserable condition of vain
regrets and bitter disappointment the while her lover lingered in the
Tower, pleased Master Pye as much as that of his own good fortune, nor
could he resist the desire to brag of his prowess to those very menials
who had witnessed his downfall. There would be no great pleasure in
the discomfiture of Mistress Peyton, unless she knew whose was the hand
that had dealt the death blow to all her cherished schemes.

Of a truth the lady was staggered when she heard of Daniel Pye's
boasts. He had been sitting in the kitchen for the past hour surrounded
by a crowd of gaping listeners, and enjoying one of the many fruits
of notoriety. The cook had placed a large venison pasty before him,
together with a tankard of ale, and lacqueys and wenches were hearing
open-mouthed the account of how Master Pye had brought my lord of
Stowmaries to disgrace, and that the life of more than one great
nobleman lay in the palm of that same Pye's very grimy hand.

Mistress Peyton, when she heard of the man's boasts and of his
popularity among her servants, had him incontinently kicked out of the
house again, but not before he had told her with insolent spite that
she was now paying for the injustice she had perpetrated on a faithful
servant close on half a year ago.

To Daniel Pye the awakening from these pleasing dreams came all too
soon. That same evening at the tavern in Whitefriars, he gathered the
truth from out the conflicting rumours which he heard. It was the new
Earl of Stowmaries who had taken upon himself the charge of conspiracy
preferred by Master Pye, and 'twas he who had confessed his guilt. What
could this mean, and what would be the consequences which would accrue
to the informant, to his future reward and future safety through this
unexpected turn of affairs?

Master Oates, consulted on the point, was for sticking to the lie on
every point. The actual personality of the man could not matter in the
least, and since this Earl of Stowmaries actually pleaded guilty to the
charge, why then, all was for the best and it was not for Daniel Pye
to worry about it all.

Master Tongue--more wary--feared a trap, but his objections were
overruled, and on the whole the infamous fraternity decided that
confrère Pye must uphold his perjuries to the end, since he would
obtain the reward whoever was condemned on his information.

"You need have no fear, good Master," concluded Oates reassuringly;
"you'll be believed in any event. Master Bedloe and myself never had
any difficulty hitherto, even though at the Stayley trial we got in
vast confusion, seeing that we made several slips which could easily
have been proved against us, had the judge and jury been so minded.
Nay! nay! Do you stick to your story. Since one Lord Stowmaries desires
to hang instead of the other, why, let him, so say I."

This cynical speech was, alas, an only too true exposé of the
situation. Daniel Pye was almost reassured, and fell to applying
himself to making his story more circumstantial. On consultation with
his friends it was decided that the recent murder of Sir Edmund Berry
Godfrey would be dragged into the indictment. That mysterious crime was
indeed a trump card in the hands of the informants. It seemed a pity
not to play it when the stakes were as high as they were just now.

Pye therefore prepared himself to state on oath that the murder was
freely projected by my lord Stowmaries with the minister of the King of
France, in the course of the treasonable interview in Paris.

But even then did the course of this true liar not run altogether
smooth, for anon it became generally known that Master Legros, tailor
of Paris, and his daughter who was none other than the wife of the
dispossessed Lord of Stowmaries, had been compelled to give evidence
for the Crown in corroboration of Master Pye's story.

Whereupon the latter fell into a state of agitation worse than before.
He stared dry-lipped and wide-eyed at the man who had come in with this
news. This was the first intimation which he had that one of his lies
at least would find him out. When he had vowed that Master Legros had
overheard the treasonable conversation between the Earl of Stowmaries
and the minister of the King of France, he had no thought that the
tailor would actually be compelled to give testimony, whether he would
or no.

Pye turned well-nigh sick at the thought. Dotard though he was, he had
no hopes that Master Legros would endorse his lies. Once more he turned
to his friends for counsel, and briefly explained to them the terrible
plight in which he now found himself.

"Mayhap I'd better disappear," he suggested timorously, "before I am
caught for perjury. It means the loss of my right hand and years of
imprisonment; mayhap in this case the rope."

"Bah, man, be not such a coward," admonished Oates boldly. He had gone
through all the anxieties himself and knew how to make light of them.
"'Twas a pity you did drag an alien's name into the case, of course,
but--"

"'Twas the magistrate suggested it to me," broke in Pye, who was on the
verge of tears; "he said that it would be better if another witness
were forthcoming, who also had heard the conversation at the hostelry
in Paris. It would strengthen my evidence, so he said."

"But why this French papist?" queried Bedloe with an oath.

"Because the tailor was in deadly enmity with my lord of
Stowmaries--with the other one, I mean--and I thought he would help me
and gladly too."

"And think you he'll turn against you?"

"I fear me that he will," quoth Pye, who truly was in a pitiable
condition.

"Then, man, you must change your tactics," now said Oates decisively.
"Nay! I repeat, do not be afraid. 'Tis you they will believe, and not
the papist tailor or his daughter. What can they say? That they did not
hear the treasonable conversation between the accused and the minister
of the King of France. Well, what of that? 'Tis but a negation, and no
evidence. The Attorney-General will soon upset such feeble testimony.
But do you swear that on thinking the matter over you now remember that
the tailor and his daughter had already left the hostelry of the 'Rat
Mort' when that treasonable consult took place and that you were in
my company and not in theirs. Then with one fell swoop do you destroy
the whole value of the Legros' evidence, and place yourself once more
in an unassailable position, for I too can swear then that I was with
you at the time, and heard the whole conversation--so be that you are
prepared to share the reward which you will get with me," concluded the
scoundrel with earnest emphasis.

Daniel Pye had no option. Of a truth he was not quite such a hardened
sinner as these professional liars who had thriven and prospered under
their organized perjuries for close on half a year.

The whole of the information against Lord Stowmaries was therefore gone
through all over again, nor was there any fear that this change of
front would in any way prejudice the noble jury against the informant.
In Coleman's case and in that of Stailey, and alas, in that of many
others, the infamous witnesses contradicted themselves and one another
to an extent which makes the modern historian gasp, when he has to put
it on record that men in England were condemned to death wholesale, on
evidence that was as flimsy as it was false.

Master Pye, once more at peace, therefore, with his prospects and with
himself, learned his new lesson with diligence. But Master Oates was
firm on one point, and that was on his share in the coming reward.
Pye demurred for a long time. Emboldened by the encouragement of his
friends, he now thought that he could carry the whole business through
alone.

Ultimately it was decided that Master Oates was to receive £5 of the
reward, provided he swore that on a certain day in April he too was
present at the tavern of the "Rat Mort" in Paris when my lord of
Stowmaries discussed with the minister of the King of France the terms
of the shameful treaty whereby King Charles was to be murdered, the
Duke of York be placed on the throne of England and the latter country
sold to the French and to the Pope of Rome.




                             CHAPTER XLIV

               For Death is of an hour, and after death
                 Peace!
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


The news that Michael Kestyon--the hero of one of the most exciting
adventures in the history of gallantry, the man who less than
twenty-four hours ago had by the king's mandate obtained the titles and
estates for which he had fought for over ten years--the news that he
had been arrested for treason connected with the hellish Popish plot,
horrified and astonished all London.

It seemed incredible that a man whose romantic personality had charmed
all the women and even fascinated the king, could lend himself to such
base treachery as to sell his country to the foreigners, and to incite
others to poison the merry monarch who even at that moment had with one
stroke of the pen seen that justice was done to the miserable reprobate.

Such is popularity! Michael, who a couple of days ago was the idol of
society, the cynosure of all eyes at assemblies or in the playhouse,
on whom the women smiled, and whom the men were proud to know, Michael
now was naught but an abominable traitor, for whom hanging and the rack
were more suitable than the block to which he was entitled by virtue of
his newly acquired dignities.

And there was no doubt as to his villainies: the infamous blackguard
had confessed, even at the time of his arrest, which no doubt had taken
him wholly by surprise, and thus forced on an avowal which would
expedite the trial and give every one a chance of seeing the traitor's
head on Tyburn gate before many days were over.

Excitement and terror had by this time so taken hold of the people
of England that all sense of justice had gone hopelessly astray, and
there was but little chance of any man--however high placed he might
be, however upright and loyal had been his conduct throughout his
life--escaping condemnation and death, once the army of false informers
and perjurers had singled him out for attack.

As for Michael, everything was against him from the first. His former
dissolute life, his long wanderings abroad, where he was supposed
to have imbibed all the imaginary desires of the foreigners to turn
England into an obedient vassal of France and Rome, also his sudden
accession to wealth and the rumours anent that certain adventure, the
details of which grew both in confusion, in mystery and even in horror
as they were passed from mouth to mouth.

When the fact that the young girl-wife of the dispossessed Earl
of Stowmaries would be one of the witnesses for the Crown became
known, gossip became still more wild. Interest in that former
adventure increased an hundred fold, and the news did of a truth give
verisimilitude to the most weird conjecture. The words black magic
and witchcraft were soon freely bandied about. Michael Kestyon was no
longer an ordinary plotter, but the veriest anti-Christ himself, who
was in league with the Pope of Rome to ruin England and to bring forth
her submission by such means even as the Lord employed against the
Egyptians in favour of the Israelites. Only in this case, the devil was
to be the instrument whereby the ten plagues were to be hurled on this
defenceless isle.

There was to be a plague of locusts and one of rats, the waters of
the Thames would turn to corroding acid and the miscreant Earl of
Stowmaries had promised to give the devil the blood of every noble
virgin in England as payment for his satanic help.

Had we not the testimony of sane-minded men and women who lived at the
time, and who witnessed every phase of that amazing frenzy which swept
over England during these awful years, we could not believe that the
people of this country, usually so gifted with sound minds and above
all with a sense of justice and of tolerance, could thus have rushed
headlong into an abyss of maniacal fanaticism which hath for ever
remained a blot upon the history of the seventeenth century.

There is a curious letter extant written by Mistress Julia Peyton in
her usual almost illegible scrawl and embellished by her more than
quaint spelling; it was addressed to her cousin, Sir John Ayloffe, a
week or so before the trial, and in it she says:

  "I wod Like to know the truth about this Story wich sayth
  that my lord Stowmaries wil be acused of witchcraft. They
  do sa he praktised Black Magic, and tried to kil the
  talor's daughter, so to use her blood for his Arts and his
  Inkantations. She being a Virgin. They do sa also that her
  Evidens against Him wil vastly startle Every one. As for me
  I tak vast Interest in the reprobate and do wish him well at
  his Trial. The husband of the talor's wench is naut to me.
  I do not desire to see him become Earl of Stowmaries, but
  rather that Michael be suksesful."

What other schemes the fair lady now nurtured in her heart we know from
the fact that she made several attempts to have access to the prisoner,
all of which were unsuccessful, despite the fact that she used the
influence of her other admirers to effect her ends, whilst on one
occasion she wrote to Cousin John:

  "An Michael doth sukseed in getting an acquittal, I pra you
  bring him to my house forthwith afterwards. Remember good
  coz that I promisd you twelve thousand pounds if I do marry
  the Earl of Stowmaries."

But beyond these secret wishes of the fair beauty, and mayhap a sigh
of regret or so from pretty lips for the handsome adventurer, popular
feeling was raging highly against the accused, and many chroniclers
aver that among the many conspirators who were brought to these
shameful trials during this time, against none was there so much
venomous hatred as there was against Michael Kestyon.

There is this to be remembered--though truly 'tis but weak palliation
for the disgraceful antagonism displayed against the accused--that this
was the first instance where a man so highly placed as was the Earl of
Stowmaries was directly implicated in the plot; he was a sop thrown
to the rampant radicalism of the anti-Church party as well as to its
intolerant fanaticism.

Public sympathy on the other hand had at once gone out to the
dispossessed Earl of Stowmaries, whom the traitor had tried to rob of
his wife and had effectually succeeded in robbing of his inheritance.

But retribution for the guilty and compensation for the innocent had
come together hand in hand. Michael Kestyon would hang, of course,
whereupon the only rightful Lord of Stowmaries would once more come
back into his own. The latter with commendable delicacy had left London
directly his cousin's arrest became known; he would not stay to gloat
over his enemy's downfall.

In fact, for the moment everything that Rupert did was right and proper
and worthy of sympathy, and everything that Michael had ever said and
done and all that he had never said or done was held up against him by
all those who awhile ago were ready to acclaim him as a friend.

Of all these rumours Michael himself knew nothing. On his arrest he had
at once pleaded guilty, hoping thereby to expedite his trial, and to
curtail the time during which he would have to linger in prison. Echoes
of the turmoil which was raging in the capital did reach him from
time to time. The murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey had sent raging
fanaticism to boiling point. Needless to say that here was another
crime to fasten on the already overburdened shoulders of the accused.

All these fresh outbursts of hatred and injustice, however, left
Michael cold and indifferent, even when through a subordinate he heard
the amazing story of how he was supposed to have tried to murder his
cousin's wife by means of black magic, he had nothing but an almost
humorous smile for the quaint monstrosity of the suggestion.

He quickly tired of prison life and though there was no pang of
suspense connected with it, for the issue was of course a foregone
conclusion, yet he fretted at the delay which the importance of his
case had brought about in the otherwise simple machinery of summary
justice.




                              CHAPTER XLV

            Her game in thy tongue is called Life
                As ebbs thy daily breath;
            When she shall speak, thou'lt learn her tongue
                And know she calls it death.
                                        --DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.


For the rest, 'tis in the domain of history. Michael could have been
tried by his peers had he so desired it. The few friends who rallied
round him urged him to demand the right, but when we remember that in
pledging his life to his cousin, his one wish was speedy condemnation
and summary death, we cannot be astonished that he refused to be tried
by those who might have been lenient toward one of themselves.

Among his peers, too, the fact would of a surety have come to light
that he did not belong to the Catholic branch of the Kestyons, that he
himself was a member of the Established Church, which--as all these
trials, alas, really amounted to religious persecution--would almost
certainly have obtained an acquittal.

Parliament--still suffering severely of its no-Popery fit--demanded
that the traitor be tried as a common criminal before the King's Bench
and required the king to issue a special commission that the day might
be fixed as soon as may be.

The accused was of course allowed no counsel, and no defence save what
he could say on his own behalf. Nor did he know the precise words of
the indictment, or what special form the informant's lies had taken.

He did not know exactly what he was supposed to have said or done, he
could only vaguely guess from what he knew of similar trials that had
gone before.

The trial of Michael Kestyon, Earl of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, did,
we know, take place before the King's Bench on the twenty-first day
of November, 1678. Lord Chief Justice Scroggs presided, and the
Attorney-General, Sir William Jones, once the friend of Michael,
addressed the jury for the Crown.

We also know that the court sat in Westminster Hall for the occasion,
as it was expected that a very large concourse of ladies and gentlemen
would desire to be present. As a matter of fact, the élite of London
society did forego on that occasion the pleasures of The Mall, and
of the playhouse in order to witness a spectacle which would rouse
the jaded senses of these votaries of fashion and whip up their
blasé emotions more than any comedy of Mr. Dryden or the late Master
Shakespeare could do.

This would be a tragedy far more moving, far more emotional than that
of Hamlet or of Romeo and Juliet, for the element of romance mingled
agreeably with that of crime, and the personality of the accused was
one that aroused the most eager interest.

Outside, a gloomy November drizzle enveloped London with its clammy
shroud. Ladies and gentlemen arrived in their chairs or their glass
coaches, wrapped to the eyes in mantles and hoods of fur. There was
a goodly array of musketeers guarding the approach to the Hall, and
a small company of the trained bands of London lined the way from
Whitehall to Westminster, for it was pretty well known that His Majesty
would come--in strict incognito--to see the last of his nine days'
favourite, who during the last few months had made Mistress Gwynne
sigh very significantly, and caused Lady Castlemaine to make invidious
comparisons between the gallant bearing of the romantic adventurer and
the mincing manners of the gentlemen of the Court.

The less exalted spectators of to-day's pageant were being kept outside
and pushed well out of the way by the soldiery; nevertheless, they
stood about patiently--ankle deep in the mud of the roadway, their
sad-coloured doublets getting soaked beneath the persistent drizzle and
exhaling a fetid odour which made the street and the open place seem
more dismal and humid than usual.

The men pressed to the front, leaving the women to shift for
themselves, to see as best they could. It was pre-eminently a spectacle
for men, since it carried with it its own element of danger. For,
look you, the Papists would be mightily rampant on this occasion,
and who knows but that a gigantic conspiracy was afoot to blow up
the Lord's House of Parliament, which would sit this day to try the
arch-conspirator.

Recollections of the Gunpowder Plot caused men to curse loudly, and to
grasp with firm hand the useful flail safely hid inside the doublet: a
good protection against personal attack, but alas, useless if the whole
of Westminster was really undermined with powder.

The 'prentices, ever to the fore, had taken French leave to-day. At
certain risk of castigation to-morrow they deserted work with one
accord and were at the best posts of observation, long before the more
sober folk had thought to leave their beds. They wriggled their meagre
bodies between the very legs of the soldiery, like so many lizards in
search of sunshine, until they had conquered their places of vantage
in the foreground whence they would presently see the prisoner when he
stepped out of the vehicle which would bring him from the Tower.

In the meanwhile the crowd wiled away the time by watching the arrival
of the grand folk, and noting their names and quality as they descended
from coach and chaise.

"That's my lord of Rochester."

"And this my lady Evelyn."

"I vow 'tis Master Pepys himself."

"And his lady, too."

"'Tis His Grace of Norfolk!"

Whereupon since the duke was a well-known Papist, there were hoots
and hisses and cries of "The stake for heretics!" in which even the
musketeers joined.

The informers came together and were vigorously cheered and loudly
acclaimed.

"An Oates! An Oates! A Bedloe! Hurrah for the saviours of the nation!"

Daniel Pye, a little anxious, was being upheld by his friend Tongue,
who kept up a running flow of encouraging words which he poured forth
into the other man's ear. He not being known to the mob remained
unnoticed. As the time drew nigh for making his lying statements more
public, the East Anglian peasant felt his courage oozing down into
his boots. Bedloe and Oates, who had gone through similar experiences
several times now, added their own encouragement to that expressed by
Tongue.

"No one will worry you," said Bedloe loftily; "they'll believe every
word you say. Only stick to your story, man, and never hesitate. They
can't contradict you: no one else was there to see."

Although the gloom outside had almost changed day into evening, yet
on entering the great hall wherein a very few lamps flickered near the
centre dais, Daniel Pye could see nothing of his surroundings. He was
glad that Oates himself took him by the arm, and piloted him through
the great hall toward a side door immediately behind the bench and
which gave on the room that had been assigned to the witnesses.

A goodly number of ladies and gentlemen wore masks when they arrived,
and among these was a man obviously young and of assured position,
for his step was firm and his movements like those of one accustomed
to have his own way in the world. He was dressed in rough clothes of
sad-coloured material, but there was nothing of the menial about his
person as he presented his paper of admission to the most exclusive
corner of the hall.

Here he sat himself down in a dark recess beneath the sill of the great
mullioned window, nor did he remove his mask as almost every one else
had done. Had not the crowd all round him been deeply engrossed in its
own excitement no doubt that some one would have challenged and mayhap
recognised the solitary figure.

But as it was, no one took notice of him. Rupert Kestyon--like the
criminal who cannot resist the impulse of once more revisiting the
scene of his crime--had returned to London to see the final act of the
great tragedy, wherein he himself was playing such a sorry part.

Not that Rupert had any fear that matters would not turn out just
as Michael had mapped them out. He knew his kinsman far too well to
imagine for a moment that he would lift a finger to save the life which
he had bartered for his cousin's loyalty to the tailor's daughter.

But in Paris, whilst waiting in seclusion and inactivity, the moment
when--the tragedy being over--he could once more resume the more
pleasing comedy of life, he felt an irresistible longing to see the
fall of that curtain, to be present when Fate dealt him his last
trump-card, the final sacrifice of the man who stood in the way of his
own advancement.

Therefore he sat there in the corner, solitary and watchful, noting the
arrival of the spectators, the appearance of the men of law, the whole
paraphernalia of justice which was about to crush an innocent man.

The hall by now was packed to overflowing; to right and left temporary
seats had been erected and covered with crimson cloth, forming an
amphitheatre which accommodated over a thousand people, amongst whom
were many that bore historic names, as well as the gayer crowd that
formed the Court set.

Vast as was the room, it had already become insufferably hot; ladies
plied their fans vigorously, whilst the men, worried with their heavy
perruques, became restless and morose. On the right hand side, and
somewhat in advance of the rest of the seats, a few more comfortable
chairs had been disposed. Here sat a man dressed in sober black, with
dark perruque pushed impatiently off his high forehead, and shifty,
mistrustful-looking eyes wandering over the sea of faces all around
him. To right and left of him ladies whispered and chatted, trying
to bring a smile to the pinched lips, and not succeeding, for the
man in the black surcoat was moody to-day, anxious, too, and vastly
dissatisfied with himself, which is ever an uncomfortable state of
mind. He had entered the Hall almost unobserved by the crowd outside,
stepping out of a closed coach in no ways different to others that had
driven up before. He had worn a mask when he arrived and only removed
it when he was already seated. Several people recognised him then,
but what cheering there came from the more brilliant members of this
promiscuous throng was quickly repressed.

Despite the many supposed attempts on the life of the king, he was far
from popular just now. Conscious of this, he frowned when he realised
that--though he was recognised by many--yet he was acclaimed only by a
very few.

Already the jury were seated and Sir Cresswell Levins was sorting his
papers, and incidentally chatting with the Attorney-General. And now
from outside came a muffled sound, like unto great breakers rolling
into shore; distant at first, it gradually drew nearer, drawing
strength as it approached. Soon through it there came, striking sharply
on the ear, the stamping of horses' hoofs on the cobblestones of the
road, and the creaking of heavy wheels through the mud. The sound
of rolling waves turned to one which came from hundreds of human
lips--hisses and groans were distinctly heard; shouts of execration,
with here and there a blasphemous oath loudly uttered against the
cursed Papists.

The prisoner had arrived.

Inside the Hall all necks were craned to catch the first glimpse of the
man who was destined mayhap not to leave this place save with the axe
suspended over his head.

The romantic tales which had clustered around the personality of
Michael Kestyon, the horrible suggestions of unavowable deeds, of
black magic and devilish incantations, had borne fruit. Though eyes
were fixed with eager curiosity on the man as he entered, though many
a pleasing shudder ran along white plump shoulders as this confederate
of Satan passed so closely by, there was not a single demonstration of
sympathy on his behalf.

The women whispered:

"He is goodly to look on!" and took stock of the prisoner's bearing,
the upright carriage of his handsome head, the quiet look of splendid
aloofness with which he regarded his surroundings.

Whereupon the men retorted gruffly:

"The emissaries of the devil are always made handsome in the eyes of
others. Satan arranges it so, else they would have no power."

Following on the prisoner's entrance, the great doors of the Hall had
been closed, whereupon the noise outside became quite deafening. The
hoots and hisses, the shouts of execration, were still apparent but
they mingled now with the clash of arms, the tramping of many feet, and
loudly repeated groans of agony. The mob, robbed of its spectacle, had
turned restive, the men broke through the lines of the soldiery and
made an effort to rush the gates of the Hall. From the officers came
quick words of command, rallying their lines from where they stretched
toward White Hall.

A few heavy blows, well aimed and vigorously dealt, with the butt end
of the muskets, a few bodies trampled beneath horses' hoofs, some
broken heads and shattered limbs, and the mob sobered down, withdrew
grumbling and cursing, but understanding that the great pageant within
was for their betters and not for them.

During the turmoil the Lord Chief Justice had entered and the prisoner
had been led to the bar; he had been made to hold up his right hand
whilst he was told why he had been brought here, and why he was made
to stand his trial. Being a peer, the Chamberlain of the Tower stood
beside him holding the axe.

Michael silently did all that he was bidden to do. The proceedings had
no interest for him. Of a truth he had been more than satisfied if the
more barbarous justice of two centuries ago had been meted out to him.
An accusation, a brief interrogation, mayhap an unpleasant quarter of
an hour in the torture chamber, then the block! How much more simple,
how much more easy to endure than this sea of curious faces, this
paraphernalia of gorgeously-clad judge and of lawyers assembled there
with the pre-conceived and firm determination to condemn the accused
whatever might betide.

The while Sir Cresswell Levins opened the case, admonishing the jury
to do their duty by the prisoner at the bar, Michael with indifferent
eyes scanned the faces all around him. He saw Mistress Julia Peyton in
the front rank of the spectators clad in exquisite pearl grey silk,
her beautiful shoulders but thinly veiled beneath filmy folds of
delicate lace. He saw the piquant face of Mistress Gwynne, the haughty
figure of Lady Castlemaine. Most of the women as they encountered his
look blushed to meet those dark eyes, which looked almost unnaturally
large in the face rendered thin and pale through the nerve-racking
experiences of the past few weeks.

Anon Michael's eyes met the restless ones of the king. He bent his head
with deep respect, for he had not yet learned to despise the man to
whom he owed all that he had, all that he was now sacrificing in order
that his snowdrop might find happiness again.

Charles Stuart turned his head away with a sigh. All that was good
and noble and kind in him went out to that man, in whose innocence he
firmly believed but whom he found was well-nigh intolerable.

But Michael now was obliged to pull his senses back to the exigencies
of the moment and he pleaded "Guilty!" in a calm and steady voice.
He had not even grasped the full meaning of the indictment read out
at full length by the Attorney-General. All he knew was that he was
accused of having plotted to murder the king, whom he revered, and of
having sold his country to the head of a Church to which he did not
happen to belong.

Michael desired his own condemnation. He was here solely for that,
in order that the man whom his ice maiden loved with that cold,
passionless heart of hers might give her all that she wanted, all that
was her due. But the inactivity of the moment was so terrible to bear.
To a man accustomed to rule his own destiny, to choose his own path,
and to say to Fate: "This will I do, and thou art my slave!" to a man
of that stamp the present situation was well-nigh intolerable.

The long-drawn-out speech of the Attorney-General, the platitudes
addressed to the accused by the Lord Chief Justice, his own answers
mechanically given soon left him wandering into the realms of unreality.

The heat in the room pressed upon his temples like a monster weight
of lead. Michael, gazing with eyes that saw not on the solemn scene
in which he was the chief personage, soon fell into a kind of torpor
akin to a trance. Ghost-like forms clad in crimson robes, grinning
faces with perruques awry, began to dance before his fevered fancy.
They twirled and turned, round and round the flickering flames of
the lamps, until these were magnified an hundredfold and multiplied
innumerably. Now faces and forms disappeared: there were only a
thousand millions of eyes that blinked and blinked, the while the lamps
were will-o'-the-wisps, glowworms with monstrous shining horns that
stood upright on iron tails and joined in the wild saraband which had
transformed the solemn Hall of Westminster into the precincts of Hell.

Then gradually all the grinning faces, all the glowing monstrosities
and witch-like forms became a gigantic circle of ruddy light wherein
flames flickered at intervals like unto a burning halo which seared the
eyes of the beholder. And right in the very centre of that transcendent
glow two faces appeared, white and ghost-like, spirits surely from a
world beyond.

Michael knew that he was dreaming, his temples and pulses were
throbbing. He had lost count of space and of time. He just breathed and
held himself upright and no more; living had become an unknown thing to
him. But the faces were there still, in the centre of the glowing halo,
and they were those of his beautiful snowdrop and of Master Legros,
tailor to the King of France.




                             CHAPTER XLVI

                   And now she spoke as when
                   The stars sang in their spheres.
                                        --DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.


His snowdrop was gazing straight at him from out great, wide eyes, her
lips were parted as if she meant to speak, and her hand lay on the arm
of her father, good Papa Legros, dressed all in black, and above whose
sombre surcoat shone a kindly face almost distorted by its expression
of anxiety and from which ran streams of perspiration which the poor
man wiped off ever and anon with a bright-coloured handkerchief.

With a mechanical movement Michael passed his hand across his eyes. His
brain returned from its long wandering in the realm of dreamland; the
light ceased to flicker, the sea of grinning faces receded into the
darkness. Michael now only saw Rose Marie. The devilish visions had
been transformed into peaceful dreams of Heaven.

Though his mind--still feverish and numb--refused to believe that she
was really there, yet his eyes took in every tiny detail of the golden
picture which they saw.

There were the tiny curls that, ever rebellious, would break through
the confines of the lace cap and flutter tantalisingly round her ear;
there was the little mole just above the lip, which gave the perfect
mouth, that otherwise had been accounted too serious, an exquisite air
of piquancy; there was the delicate rise of the throat, peeping above
the lace kerchief, a god-like snare wherein he had once dared to hope
that his lips would be entrapped.

And all the while that Michael looked on his beloved, Daniel Pye was
busy with his perjuries, and Master Oates stood up to corroborate
these. Once or twice the Lord Chief Justice had turned to the accused,
expecting a contradiction of such obvious lies. But the only word that
ever escaped the latter's lips came mechanically as from one who had
learned a lesson by heart.

"I am guilty--what these men say is true."

Once the Attorney-General had spoken quite irritably:

"The prisoner's attitude, my lord," he said, "is one of contempt for
this Court. He must be made to answer more fully the charges that are
preferred against him."

"Then 'tis for you to question him," retorted the Lord Chief Justice
drily.

Emboldened by Michael's attitude of passive acquiescence, Pye and Oates
surpassed themselves. Their story gained in detail, in circumstantial
broiderings under cross-examination. Once or twice their imagination
and impudence carrying them too far, they palpably contradicted one
another. A man's voice then rose from the midst of the spectators:
"These men are accursed liars!"

The voice was authoritative and loud, as of a man accustomed to be
obeyed. And no one cried "Hush!" to the remark, since it came from
royal lips.

After an examination which we know lasted nearly an hour, the two
witnesses were dismissed. They left the great hall together and walked
with an assured air of satisfaction across to the small room beyond
the bench, where they were bidden to wait in case they were required
again. To a sanely judicial mind the only point which would present
itself in the evidence of these miscreants as being uncontradicted and
unquestionably established by them, was that the treasonable converse
between the accused and a minister of the King of France did take
place at the tavern of the "Rat Mort" in Paris in the evening of the
nineteenth day of April of this same year.

Beyond that it was a tangle which Michael, had he chosen, could easily
have unravelled in his own favour. But this he did not mean to do; he
was only anxious for the end.

While the lying informer spoke of that same nineteenth day of April
his thoughts flew back on the sable wings of a dead past to all the
memories that clung to that day.

The religious ceremony at St. Gervais, the dance on the dusty floor of
the tailor's back shop, the ride through the darkness along the lonely
road with his beloved clinging to him, the while his arm ached with an
exquisite sense of numbness under the delicious burden which it bore.

These men spoke of the evening of that nineteenth day of April! Oh, the
remembrance of every hour, every minute which the date recalled!

The darkened room in the old inn, the streaks of moonbeam which kissed
the gold of her hair, the April breeze which caused her curls to
flutter, and the sighing of the reeds and young acacia boughs like
spirit whisperings that presaged impending doom!

Her voice, her eyes, so tender, for that one brief day! Would not the
remembrance of it be graven on his heart when after so much joy, such
hopeless abnegation, it would cease to beat at last.

Of a truth can you wonder that Michael was impatient for the end? He
had seen his snowdrop through the gossamer veil of a day-dream across
the crowded court and the vision had caused him to realise more fully
than he had ever done before how impossible life would be without her.

Thank God, that he had pledged his life to his cousin! Thank God, that
Rupert had accepted the pledge, and gave in exchange for the worthless
trifle, his own loyalty to Rose Marie.

Then why so many parleyings, such long, empty talk, such tortuous
questionings? Michael had pleaded guilty and almost asked for death.

Even as with an impatient sigh of intense weariness he had for the
twentieth time that day spoken his mechanical "Guilty!" there was
general movement amongst the spectators. Imagine a hive of bees
swarming round their queen: the women leaned forward clutching their
fans, forgetting the heat and the discomfort of those long hours. The
men put up spy-glasses the better to see what went on in the centre
of the stage, the while a murmur of excitement ran right through the
assembly.

Papa Legros was being led by a gorgeously-clad usher in the direction
of the bar, opposite to the prisoner, whilst his daughter walked by his
side.

Dormant attention had indeed been roused, necks were craned to get a
better view of the interesting witnesses.

"She is the wife of my lord of Stowmaries," came in whispers all round
the hall, like the swish of the wind through poplar trees.

"What--of the prisoner?"

"No! No! Of the man whom he dispossessed and who will be Lord of
Stowmaries again, once this man is hanged."

"She is very young."

"Ay--a girl-wife. 'Tis her whom the accused tried to murder, so that
he might offer her blood in sacrifice to the devil."

But this statement obtained little credence now.

"The accused does not look like a wizard, or an emissary of the devil,"
commented the ladies.

"Yet the girl is there to testify against him."

"That is because she must hate him so. She is the wife of the man whom
the accused hath dispossessed. They say she dearly loves her husband,
yet did the accused try and steal her from him."

"She will make a handsome Countess of Stowmaries anon," quoth Lord
Rochester with his wonted cynicism, and speaking in the ear of his
royal master, "What think you, sire?"

"Odd's fish!" retorted Charles Stuart. "If she proved as big a liar as
these damnable informers then is there no virtue writ plainly on any
woman's face."

There certainly was something infinitely pathetic in the appearance
of father and daughter: he in his clothes of deep black, and with the
tears of anxiety and perturbation rolling slowly down his cheeks. She
fragile and slender, with pale, delicate face and eyes wherein girlish
timidity still fought against a woman's resolve.

No wonder that for the moment every unkind comment was hushed. The
Countess of Stowmaries--as she was already universally called--seemed
to command respect as well as sympathy. With a great show of kindness,
the Lord Chief Justice himself spoke directly to the two witnesses,
asking their names and quality, as was required for form's sake.

Rose Marie now no longer looked at the accused. She stood beside her
father, tall and stately as the water-lilies to which the man who loved
her so ardently had once compared her. The mud of the world had left
her unsmirched; she carried her head high, for the slimy tendrils of
men's unavowable passions, of trickery, of lies and deceit had not
reached the high altitude whereon her purity sat enthroned.

Her father was the witness called on behalf of the Crown; he had made
his statement on oath, and stood here now to repeat it before all the
world. His daughter was his interpreter, since he was unacquainted with
the English language.

Her voice was clear and firm as in answer to the questions put to her
by the Lord Chief Justice she gave her father's humble name and quality
and then her own as Mistress Kestyon, wife of Rupert Kestyon, erstwhile
known as my Lord of Stowmaries and Rivaulx.




                             CHAPTER XLVII

          Love that is root and fruit of terrene things,
          Love that the whole world's waters shall not drown
          The whole world's fiery forces not burn down.
                                                     --SWINBURNE.


Michael could scarce believe his own eyes. The reality had brought
him back with irresistible force from his day-dream to the tangible
situation of the moment.

Papa Legros was here with Rose Marie. So much was true; that was no
longer in the domain of dreams. They had been brought here to add their
testimony to the lies spoken by the informers.

Torturing devils, whispering in Michael's ears, made this hellish
suggestion. With it came an intensity of bitterness. He had thought
that the old man loved him, yet his appearance here and now seemed like
petty vengeance wreaked on a fallen enemy.

Michael ground his teeth, trying to drive these whispering devils
away. He would not--even at a moment such as this--lose if only for an
instant his perfect faith in the purity of the woman he loved. If she
stood here, it was for a noble purpose. What that purpose could be,
not even the mad conjectures of his own fevered fancy could contrive
to imagine; his veins were throbbing and he could not think. Only the
puzzle confronted him now, mocking his own obtuseness; the laggard
brain, that had suffered so long, and was now dormant, unable to guess
the riddle which could not be aught save one of life or death.

All he did know was that Rose Marie was standing there before all these
people, she the very essence of purity and of truth, and that she was
being made to swear that she would speak the truth. Was this not a vile
mockery, masters, seeing that naught but what was true could ever fall
from her lips?

Now the Attorney-General was questioning her father, with thin,
sarcastic lips curled in a smile. Rose Marie replied calmly and firmly,
interpreting her father's answers, not looking once on the accused,
but almost always straight before her, save when she threw a look of
encouragement on good Papa Legros, who then would pat her hand with
unaffected tenderness.

"And you were present, so the other witness swore in his original
information, on the 19th day of April, with him at the tavern of the
'Rat Mort' in Paris, and you did on that same evening hear the accused
hold converse with one who was minister to His Majesty the King of
France?"

The Attorney-General's voice was metallic, trenchant, like a knife;
it reached the furthermost distance of the great hall and grated
unpleasantly on Michael's ear. He hated to see his beloved standing
there before that gaping crowd. He cursed the enforced inactivity which
made of him a helpless log when with every fibre within him he longed
to take her in his arms and carry her away to a secluded spot where
impious eyes were not raised to her snow-white robes.

"My lord," he interposed loudly, "I have confessed to my guilt. What
this witness may have to say can have naught to do with the plain fact.
I am guilty. I have confessed. Cannot your lordship have mercy and pass
sentence as soon as may be?"

"Prisoner at the bar," rejoined the Lord Chief Justice, "'tis not for
you to dictate the procedure of justice. 'Tis my duty to hear every
witness who hath testimony to lay before this court. You have confessed
your guilt, 'tis true, but on such confession the law will not hold
you guilty, until you have so been proved; and for the sake of the
witnesses who have testified against you, as well as for the sake of
justice, we must obtain corroboration of their statements."

Then he turned once more to Papa Legros and graciously bade him to make
answer to the questions put by the Attorney-General.

Rose Marie, before she spoke, turned and looked on Michael. Their eyes
met across that vast assembly and as in one great vivid flash, each
read in those of the other the sublime desire for complete sacrifice.

In a moment Michael understood; in that one brief flash and through the
unexplainable telepathy which flew from her soul to his, the truth had
burst upon him with the appalling force of absolute conviction.

She, the woman whom he adored, who was a saint exalted in his mind
above every other woman on earth, she was about to throw her fair fame,
her honour, her purity as a plaything to this crowd of hyena-like
creatures, who would fall on the tattered remnants of her reputation
and tear its last fragments to shreds.

This she meant to do. This was the grim and sublime answer to the
riddle which had so puzzled Michael when first he saw his Rose Marie in
this court. She meant to give her honour for his life. She loved him
and came here to offer her all--her own, her father's good name, so
that he--Michael--should be saved.

The terrible, awful agony of this thought, the mad, tumultuous joy!
Here was the moment at last--the one second in the illimitable cycle
of time--when if there be mercy in Heaven or on earth, the kiss of
Death should bring peace to the miserable wastrel who had in this brief
flash of understanding tasted an eternity of happiness.

She loved him and was here to save him! But Heavens above, at what a
cost!

He looked round him like some caged beast, determined at all hazards to
make a mad dash for liberty.

It could not be! No, no; it should not be! Surely God in Heaven could
not allow this monstrous sacrifice; surely the thunderbolts from above
would come down crashing in the midst of this mocking, jeering assembly
before his exquisite snowdrop dragged her immaculate white skirts in
the mire.

What he did or how he fought, Michael himself scarcely knew. What was
he but one small, helpless atom in this avalanche of callous lawmakers?
All that he did know was that with all the strength at his command he
protested his guilt again and again, imploring judgment, uttering wild
words of treason that might secure his own immediate condemnation.

"My lord, my lord," he cried loudly, "in the name of Heaven as you
yourself hope for justice hereafter, listen not to these witnesses.
I swear to you that they will only confirm what the others have
said. I am guilty--thrice guilty, I say--yes, I plotted to murder
the king. I plotted to sell England to France and to Rome. I admit
the truth of every word the informers have uttered. I am guilty, my
lord--guilty--judgment, in Heaven's name--I ask for judgment."

"Prisoner at the bar, I command you to be silent."

Silent, silent when so monstrous a thing was about to happen! As well
command the giant waves lashed into madness by the fury of the wind
to be silent when they break upon the rocks. The Lord Chief Justice
commanded the musketeers to restrain this madman, to force him to hold
his tongue, to drown his voice with the clatter of their arms.

The spectators stared aghast, women gasped with fear, the men were awed
despite themselves in the presence of this raging torrent of a man's
unbridled passion.

The general impression which this scene had created was of course
that the prisoner was dreading some awful revelation which these two
witnesses might make. He was avowing his guilt, therefore he did not
hope to escape death; once more the superstitious dread of witchcraft
rose in the minds of all. Was the accused--already practically
condemned for treason--in fear that his death would mean the stake
rather than the block?

A close phalanx gathered round the person of the king, who with a
cynical smile was watching the confusion which occurred round the
august majesty of this court. But he waved aside those who would have
stood between him and Michael.

"He'll quieten down anon," he said simply, "and if I mistake not,
gentlemen, we shall then learn a lesson which throughout our lives we
are not like to forget."

Was it accident or design? Had Michael fought like a madman, or had
his brain merely given way under an agonizing moral blow. Certain it
is that suddenly he felt a terrible pain in his head, his senses were
reeling, his tongue, parched and dry, refused to obey the dictates of
his will that bade it protest again and again, until his heart could no
longer beat, until his last breath had left his body.

He tottered and would have fallen but for strong arms that held him
up. He felt that irons were being placed on his wrists, that four pairs
of hands gripped his arms and shoulders so that he could no longer
move. The pain in his head was well-nigh intolerable; he closed his
eyes in the vain effort not to swoon.

It was the butt end of a musket that had rendered him helpless. From
the lips of many spectators came loud invectives against the miscreant
who had dared to strike a peer; vaguely reaching the half-unconscious
brain came the sound of voices, also the cry from a woman's throat,
heard above all the others, uttered with an intensity of agony even as
he fell.

With Michael's half-swoon the turmoil had somewhat subsided. The
musketeers round him, terrified at their comrade's act, were bathing
the prisoner's head with water hastily obtained. The spectators, deeply
moved--unable to understand the inner meaning of the strange scene
which they had just witnessed--were talking excitedly to one another.

Conjectures, wild guesses, flew from mouth to mouth.

And in the midst of all this noise, and of all the confusion, Rose
Marie had remained calm, holding her father by the hand. Only when the
dastardly blow felled the fighting lion down, then only did a cry of
pain escape her trembling lips. Now when comparative stillness reigned
around her, she once more faced the judges. Michael was now helpless,
she could offer up her sacrifice in peace.

The Lord Chief Justice repeated his question and even as he began
speaking complete silence fell upon all.

"Will you swear before this court that on the evening of the nineteenth
day of April you were present with Master Pye and Doctor Oates at the
hostelry of the 'Rat Mort' in Paris and there on that same evening
did hear the accused holding converse with a minister of the King of
France?"

"No, milor," replied Rose Marie firmly; "my father was not present on
the evening of the nineteenth day of April in the tavern of the 'Rat
Mort' in Paris, nor in any other tavern, nor did the accused hold
converse on that same evening with a minister of the King of France.
And this do I swear in my father's name and mine own."

"But," interposed the Attorney-General in his dry, sarcastic tone, "the
former witnesses have sworn that you were there present together with
them, when the converse did take place."

"Those witnesses have lied, my lord," spoke Rose Marie.

"Take care, Mistress," admonished the Lord Chief Justice, "you do bring
a grave charge against those witnesses."

"A grave charge yet a true one, my lord. Yet what they have sworn to is
both false and grave."

"Yet are you sworn in as a witness for the Crown."

"And as a witness for the Crown do I speak," rejoined Rose Marie
simply, "for the Crown of England is the crown of truth, and my father
and I are here for the truth."

"Which mayhap will bear fuller investigation," quoth Sir William Jones
with a sneer.

"As full an one as you desire, my lords."

"Then pray, Mistress, since you and your father do swear that you were
not at the hostelry of the 'Rat Mort' in Paris on the evening of the
nineteenth of April, how comes it that you can state so positively that
the accused did not then and at that place hold treasonable converse
with the minister of the King of France, as the other witnesses have
testified?"

Rose Marie paused before she answered; it almost seemed as if she
wished to wait until all disturbing sounds had died down in the vast
hall, so that her fresh and firm voice should ring clearly from end to
end.

Then she spoke, looking straight at the judge:

"Because of the truth of the statement, my lord," she said, "to which
my father hath already sworn before the magistrate, and to which he
must, it seems, now swear openly before this court, according to the
laws of your country. The accused, my lord, could not have been present
at a hostelry in Paris, or held converse with a minister of the King
of France on the evening of the nineteenth day of April, for on that
day did I plight my troth to him at the Church of St. Gervais, and he
did spend the full day in my father's house. At five o'clock in the
afternoon he did journey with me to St. Denis and there remained with
me at the hostelry of the 'Three Archangels,' when my father came and
fetched me away."

"It is false," came faintly whispered from the lips of the prisoner,
whose consciousness only seemed to return for this brief while, that he
might register a last protest against the desecration of his saint.

Rose Marie's words had rung clearly and distinctly from end to end of
the hall. After she spoke, after that protest from the accused, dead
silence fell on all. Only the fluttering of the fans came as a strange
moaning sound, hovering in the over-heated air.

Excitement like the embodiment of a thousand spirits flew across and
across on wings widely outstretched--unseen yet tangible. Soon a
half-audible curse spoken from beneath the mullioned windows broke the
spell of awed silence.

Rupert Kestyon, with rage and shame surging in his heart, fear, too, at
the possible consequences of this unexpected interference, muttered
angry oaths beneath his breath. Then like the ripple of innumerable
waves, an hundred exclamations rose from every corner of the court.
Lord Rochester was seen to whisper animatedly to the king. Mistress
Peyton turned and held hurried converse with Sir John Ayloffe, who
sat at her elbow. A few women tried to titter; the lowering cloud of
scandal made vain endeavour to spread itself over the head of that
slender girl who stood there before the judge, fearless and impassive
beneath this gathering tempest of sneers and evil words.

She had heard the muttered oath, spoken by lips that she had already
learned to dread, and her calm, blue eyes, serene as the skies of her
native Provence, sought the lonely figure beneath the mullion, and
rested on it with a look of challenge and of defiance. She had meant
and desired to be loyal to him, she would have clung to him through
sorrow and loneliness, humiliation and derision, if need be, but Fate
had been too strong for her. The man she loved was in peril of his life
and could only be saved at the sacrifice of her own loyalty and of her
honour.

There had never been any conflict within her. The moment she knew how
the accusation stood against her beloved, she mapped out her course and
never swerved.

Come contumely and disgrace, public scandal and her own undoing, she
was ready for it all. It had been over-easy to guess what had occurred:
how Michael had come to be accused of that which was threatening his
cousin. Rose Marie understood it, even as if she had been present at
the interview between the two kinsmen, when one man sold his life for
the other's loyalty and for her happiness.

All this and more her glance across the court told to Rupert Kestyon.
It told him that ready as she had been to follow him even at the cost
of her own misery, she was not ready to pay for his safety with the
life of the man whom alone she loved.

Michael may have sinned. He did sin, no doubt, against God and
against her, but God of a truth had made him suffer enough. It was
Rupert's turn now to pay, and pay he must. Small coin it was, for his
child-wife's disgrace, his own humiliation at the inevitable scandal
and consequent gossip was but small money indeed beside the boundless
wealth of self-sacrifice which Michael had been ready to throw in his
cousin's lap.

Perhaps that something of the magnetism which emanated from her
personality, perhaps the subtle and mysterious magic which Love
exercises over all who think and who feel, affected these people who
were present at this memorable scene. Certain it is that there were
but very few men and women in this stately hall who did not feel an
undefinable sense of sympathy for the three chief actors of the drama
which they were witnessing.

The Lord Chief Justice--at best a hard and cynical man of the world,
a man on whom history hath cast a mantle of opprobrium--was strangely
impressed. He had watched the girl very closely whilst she spoke, had
noted the looks which passed between father and daughter and thence
across to the prisoner at the bar, and something of the truth of the
soulful sacrifice which all three were prepared to make dawned upon his
alert brain.

His words were the first clear tones that rose above the babel of
whisperings and titters; he turned directly to Master Legros and
addressed him personally, speaking in fluent French.

"Your daughter, Master," he said, "hath made a strange statement. Do
you endorse its purport?"

"My daughter spoke the truth, milor," replied Papa Legros quietly,
"and I endorse every word which she hath said."

"Upon your oath?"

"On mine oath."

"It is false, my lord," murmured Michael still feebly, but making
frantic efforts to keep his wandering spirits in bondage. "It is false,
on my soul--I was in Paris--not at St. Denis--the lady is unknown to
me--I am guilty."

"You hear the prisoner's protest, Master?" queried the judge, once more
speaking directly to Legros. "If your statement be true, he is your
bitter enemy."

"He did my daughter a great wrong, my lord, but he is an innocent man,
unjustly accused of a grave crime. I cannot let him die for that which
he hath not done."

"Yet doth he protest his guilt."

"'Tis natural that he should thus protest, my lord. He hath taken on
his own shoulders the burden of another. Yet I would have you believe
that I would not stand by now, and see my daughter sacrificing her good
name for any cause save that of truth."

Papa Legros spoke with so much simplicity, such perfect dignity, and
withal had made so logical a statement, that it seems impossible to
imagine that it should not carry at least as much conviction to the
minds of judge and jury and of all the assembly as the obviously lying
statements of the informers had done. Yet such was the temper of the
times, such the wave of intolerant fanaticism which had passed over
the country, that even whilst good Master Legros was stating so noble
and simple a point of truth, the first murmurs of dissent against him
and his daughter rose throughout the hall: whispered words of "foreign
papist," of "prejudiced witnesses," of "a wench and her lover," flew
from mouth to mouth.

Rose Marie, whose sensibilities were attuned to their highest pitch,
felt this wave of antipathy, even before its first faint echo had
actually reached her ears.

She was quite clever enough to know that the simple mention of an
actual fact by herself and her father would not be sufficient to turn
the tide of judicial sympathy back toward Michael, after the perjuries
of men who had for some time now been exalted into popular heroes; she
had, alas, known only too well that she had not yet reached the summit
of that Calvary which she had set herself to climb for the loved one's
sake.

There were yet many cups of bitter humiliation which she and her kind
father would have to drain ere an innocent man was forbidden to give
his life for another, and the first of these was being held to her lips
even now by the Attorney-General, as he said, turning once more to her:

"You are aware, Mistress, of these statements to which your father hath
sworn in open court. Do you on your own account and independently of
your father, add your sworn testimony to his?"

"I do, sir," she replied; "I swear, quite independently of what my
father hath said, that on the evening of the 19th day of April, when
the false witnesses aver that my lord of Stowmaries was in Paris, he
was at St. Denis with me."

"You are quite sure of the date?"

"Am I like to forget?"

"Odd's fish!" he retorted, with a sarcastic curl of the lips, "when a
pretty wench is in love."

"I am the wife of Rupert Kestyon, formerly styled my lord of
Stowmaries," she rejoined with calm emphasis. "Had my father kept
silent, had he not endeavoured to clear an innocent man of an unjust
charge by giving up that which he holds most dear--his daughter's
honour and his own good name--had he remained silent, I say, then would
the accused have suffered death, my husband would have succeeded to
his title and estates, and I would have duly become the Countess of
Stowmaries and Rivaulx, the richest, mayhap the most honoured lady in
this beautiful land. Think you, then, that 'tis the caprice of wanton
love that would make me swear what I did? Think you that--unless truth
and honour itself compelled him--my father would lend a hand to the
degradation of his own child?"

What Michael endured in agony of mind throughout this time, it
were almost impossible to conceive. Imagine that type of man--the
adventurer, the soldier of fortune, the carver of his own destiny, good
or bad, the dictator of his own fate! Imagine that man for the first
time in his life rendered absolutely helpless the while his fate, his
life, was being decided on by others. After those first mad and useless
protests, after that wild struggle for freedom of speech, for the right
to refuse this whole-hearted sacrifice, this offering of the lily on
the altar of love, he had remained silent, with his head buried in his
hands, driving his finger nails into his own flesh, longing with a mad
longing of pain to find a means of ending his own existence here and
now, before his snowdrop had suffered the full consequences of her own
heaven-born impulse.

Ye gods above! And he--Michael--had doubted her love for him! Fool,
fool that he had been, even for a moment, even in thought to give
her up to another. He who had ever been ready to account for his own
actions, who with the arrogant pride of fallen angels had always looked
his own sins in the face, grinning, hideous monsters though they may
have been--how came it that when first she spoke cold words to him he
did not then silence them with a kiss, how came it that he did not then
and there take her in his arms, defying the laws of men, for the sake
of the first, the greatest of God's laws which gives the woman to the
man?

Fool that he had been to think of aught save love, and of love alone.

And all the while, Rose Marie, calm and still as the very statue of
abnegation, was completing her work of self-immolation. When the
Attorney-General-with sneering lips and mocking eyes threw discredit on
those statements which she and her dear father were making at the cost
of their own honour, she felt the first terrible pang of fear. Not for
herself or her future, but for him whom she longed to save and lest
her sacrifice be made and yet remain useless. Just for that moment,
her serenity gave way. She looked all round her on that sea of jeering
faces, longing to cry for help, just as with her whole attitude she had
until this moment only called for justice.

Once more her eyes lighted on Rupert Kestyon, her husband, throwing him
a challenge, which now had almost become a prayer. He could if he would
help her even now. She had become naught to him, of course. Whatever he
said could not add to her disgrace; but he could help to save Michael
if he would.

She met his lowering glance, the look of hatred and wrath which
embraced her and her father, and the obstinate set of jaw and lips
which spoke of the determination to win his own safety, his own
advancement and the furtherance of his own ambition now and at any cost.

But when the iron determination of a woman who loves, and who fights
for the safety of the man she loves, comes in contact with the cold
obstinacy of a man's ambition, then must the latter yield to the
overwhelming strength of the other.

Rupert Kestyon could have saved Michael at cost of his own immediate
exaltation, and thus saved Rose Marie a final and complete humiliation,
but this, his every look told her that he would not do. Therefore after
that quick glance, her eyes no longer challenged him; she feared that
if she dragged him forcibly into this conflict with perjury, his own
self-interest would make a stand against justice. Heaven alone knew to
what evil promptings his ambition would listen at the moment, when the
one life--already so splendidly jeopardised--stood between him and the
title and wealth which he coveted.

She did not know that any one save her father and herself could speak
with certainty as to that memorable evening of April nineteenth when
she went forth--cruel, cold and resentful--leaving Michael alone and
desolate at the inn of St. Denis.

Even now the Attorney-General, fresh to the charge, pressed her with
his sarcastic comments.

"You speak well, fair Mistress," he said blandly, "but you know no
doubt that your story needs corroboration. Two witnesses who are
Englishmen and members of our National Church have sworn that the
prisoner spent the evening of April the nineteenth in treasonable
converse with an enemy of this country and in their presence; mark
you that the accused himself hath confessed to his guilt. Yet do you
swear that he spent that day and evening in your company, until so
late that a cruel father came and dragged you away from the delectable
privacy. But with all due acknowledgment to the charm of your presence,
Mistress," added Sir William Jones, suddenly dropping his bland manner
and speaking with almost studied insolence, "you must see for yourself
that if a wench desires that she be credited, she must above all bear a
spotless reputation, and this on your own acknowledgment you flung to
the winds, the day that you--avowedly married to Mr. Rupert Kestyon,
formerly styled Earl of Stowmaries--did publicly flout your marriage
vows by leaving your father's house in company with the accused. Now
justice, though blind, my wench, doth wish to see farther than a minx's
tale which mayhap hath been concocted to save her gallant from the
block."

The girl had not winced at the insults. Happily her father had not
understood them, and the issue at stake was far too great to leave room
for vain indignation or even for outraged pride. What bitter resentment
she felt was for Michael's sake. She knew how every insolent word
uttered by that bland cynic in the name of the law and of justice,
would strike against the already-overburdened heart of the man who
loved her with such passionate adoration. The impotence that weighed on
Michael now was of a truth the most bitter wrong to bear in the midst
of all this misery. Samson bound and fettered was helpless in the hands
of the Philistines. Prometheus chained to the rock saw the vultures
hovering over him and the eagles pecking at his heart.

"As to that, sir," replied Rose Marie quietly, after a brief pause,
"these honourable gentlemen here whom you call the jury will have to
judge for themselves as to who hath lied: those other witnesses or
I--they who have everything to gain, or I and my father, who have
everything to lose. But you say that the justice of this land will need
corroboration of our statements ere she turns to right an innocent
man. This corroboration, sir, you shall have, an you will tell me what
form it shall take."

"Some other witness of the prisoner's presence in your company at the
inn of St. Denis during the day and evening of April nineteenth,"
retorted Sir William Jones brusquely.

"I know only of the innkeeper himself and his wife," she rejoined.
"Simple folk to whose testimony--seeing the temper of the people of
England just now--you would scarce give credence, mayhap."

"Mayhap not," quoth the Attorney-General mockingly.

"Yet think again, Mistress," interposed the Lord Chief Justice not
unkindly, "corroboration the law must have--if not to right the
innocent then to punish the guilty."

The young girl's eyes closed for a moment. She clung to her father in
pathetic abandonment; beads of perspiration stood on her forehead; her
eyes were dry and hot and her throat parched. But for Papa Legros'
presence mayhap her magnificent calm would have deserted her then. She
drew herself together, however, and a look of understanding passed
between father and daughter. Then the tailor drew a paper from his
pocket.

It was a large and heavy document and it bore two huge seals engraved
with the arms of the Holy See. This Papa Legros gave into an usher's
hand, who in his turn handed it up to the Lord Chief Justice.

"What is this paper?" queried His Lordship.

"It is a dispensation, my lord," replied Rose Marie firmly, "signed by
His Holiness the Pope, as you will see. It was granted to my husband,
Rupert Kestyon, then styled my Lord of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, giving
him leave to avail himself of the laws of England, which would, on his
request, annul his marriage with one Rose Marie Legros, who did on
the nineteenth day of April, 1678, break her sworn marriage vows by
contracting with Michael Kestyon a--"

But even as the awful words trembled on the girl's lips, Michael's
restraint completely gave way. Despite the soldiers around him--who
of a truth were taken by surprise--despite the hopeless futility of
his former attempt--he broke through the rank of musketeers who were
surrounding him, and with a cry as that of a wild animal wounded unto
death, he bounded forward to where his snowdrop stood, and with one arm
round her, pressing her to him with all the strength of passion held in
check so long, he, with the other hand placed upon her mouth, smothered
the word which would have escaped her lips.

"My lord, my lord," he cried, "is this justice? Sire, you are here
present! Where is your kingly power? Will you not stop this desecration
of the purest, holiest thing on earth? Are we in the torture chambers
of our forefathers that men in England will listen unmoved to this?"

He had taken the guard so completely by surprise that the men were
still standing mute and irresolute, the while the prisoner with defiant
head erect challenged the king himself to intervene. He had sunk on one
knee, his arm still round the form of his beloved. No one would have
dared to touch him then, for he was like a wild beast defending its
mate.

Rose Marie's strength had indeed failed her at last; when she felt
herself falling against the breast of the man whom she so ardently
loved, all her calm, all her resolution suddenly gave way. Once more
she was the woman, the pure, tender-hearted, gentle-nurtured child,
content to rest in the protecting arms of her lord, content to live for
his happiness, or to share his disgrace.

"If I feared you before, my lord--meseems that I could love you now,"
her cold lips seemed to murmur the echo of the very first words of love
which they had ever uttered.

And a groan of agony escaped the poor blackguard's overburdened heart.
No longer splendid now, no longer defiant or proud--but humbled from
his self-exalted state of arrogant manhood. And she, the slender
water-lily, had of her own free will allowed the mud of a polluted
world to soil the exquisite whiteness of her gown. She had descended
from her lofty pedestal of saint-like aloofness, in order to link her
fate to his--her sins to his--her life and love to his own. Fate and
the overwhelming love of a woman had conquered his will.

"I am a man and what I do, I do!"

"No!" love triumphant had retorted, "for what _I_ command that must
thou do. I am the ruler, thou my slave! Whoever thou art, I am thy
master and the arbiter of thy destiny!"




                            CHAPTER XLVIII

                                        And not ever
           The justice and the truth o' the question carries
           The due o' the verdict with it.
                                              --HENRY VIII. V. 1.


At Michael's call, at his sudden rush for the protection of his
beloved, general confusion prevailed such as had never before been
witnessed in the sober halls of Westminster.

Gorgeously-clad gentlemen of high degree, ladies in silks and brocades,
elbowed and pushed one another, climbing on their chairs, in order
to have a clear view of the small group on the floor of the hall at
the foot of the judge's bench--Michael kneeling on one knee, Rose
Marie half prostrate on the ground, Papa Legros with large coloured
handkerchief mopping his streaming forehead.

These were times when men gave freer rein to their emotions than they
do now; they were not ashamed of them, and modern civilisation had not
yet begun to propagate its false doctrine that only what is ugly and
sordid is real, and what is fine and noble--and therefore mayhap a
trifle unbridled and primitive--is false and must be suppressed.

That public feeling had--with characteristic irresponsibility--veered
round to the accused and to these two witnesses was undoubted. The
poignancy of the situation had told on every one's nerves. It had been
a moving and palpitating drama, vivid, real and pulsating with love,
the noble passion that makes the whole world kin.

The same men and women who awhile ago had clamoured for the traitor's
head, who had heaped opprobrium, invectives and curses upon him, were
now quite prepared to demand his acquittal, with as little logic in
their sympathy as they had shown in their unreasoning vituperations.
The same primeval vices of bigotry and intolerance that had presided
at the trials of Stailey and Coleman and sent them to the gallows, sat
here in judgment, too, equally intolerant of contradiction, equally
bigoted and peremptory.

In the midst of this unprecedented turmoil which had turned stately
Westminster Hall into an arena filled with wildly-excited spectators,
the ushers' loud calls for silence were absolutely drowned. Nor could
the Attorney-General and the Lord Chief Justice make themselves heard
by the jury, even though his lordship did his best to admonish these
twelve honourable gentlemen not to allow their sentiment to run away
with their conscience.

"Justice, good Masters, justice above all! Remember these people are
all Papists. They will help one another through thick and thin. What is
a papal dispensation, good Masters? It can be bought and bartered. 'Tis
a true witness we want, an honourable witness to prove the truth of
what may be but a fabulous concoction, devised to cheat the gallows of
a traitor."

"Nay, then odd's fish!" here interposed a loud voice from out the
crowd; "since it must be, it shall be, and here, my Lord Justice, is a
witness to your hand whose honourability I'll challenge you to doubt."

The tones rang clear and loud; they were those of a man accustomed to
be heard in large or small assemblies, of a man who knew how to make
his presence felt and his word obeyed.

Instantly the waves of murmurs, of cries, of excited whispers were
stilled. Eyes so long fixed on the moving spectacle at the foot of the
bench were turned in the direction of the speaker.

It was my Lord of Rochester, standing beside the king. He waited a
moment, then taking the judge's silence for assent, and obviously
encouraged by a nod from His Majesty himself, he made his way to the
witness bar.

"My Lord of Rochester," protested the Attorney-General sternly, "by
what right do you come forward at this hour?"

"By the right that every man hath in England, to bear testimony for or
against a man or woman accused of crime," replied my Lord of Rochester.
"I stand here as a witness on behalf of the prisoner, and called by the
other witness--Rose Marie Legros--to corroborate what she already hath
said."

"Do you swear?"

"I'll swear to tell all the truth and nothing but the truth, so help me
God."

"All on behalf of the accused?" sneered Sir William Jones.

"Every word which I must utter will be in his favour, sir, seeing
that on the nineteenth day of April, I too, in company with Mister
Rupert Kestyon, then styled my Lord of Stowmaries and Rivaulx, and
with Sir John Ayloffe, were present at the Church of St. Gervais
where Mistress Rose Marie Legros did plight her troth to the accused.
We witnessed their departure from the church to the house of Master
Legros, tailor-in-chief to His Majesty the King of France, where
great festivities were then the order of the day. The accused and
Mistress Rose Marie Legros did start for St. Denis on that selfsame
afternoon in the presence of a vast number of spectators, from whom I
had detailed account of the event. We--that is Mister Rupert Kestyon,
Sir John Ayloffe and myself--did make for St. Denis less than an hour
after the accused and the lady had left the tailor's house. We arrived
at the inn of the 'Three Archangels' at ten of the clock and there
found the accused all alone, and we did stay with him, and supped with
him until far into the night. This do I swear on my most solemn oath,
and, therefore, any one who says that the accused was in Paris on the
evening of that nineteenth day of April is a liar and a perjurer--so
help me God!"

My Lord of Rochester's lengthy speech was listened to in silent
attention. Michael, kneeling beside Rose Marie, scarcely heeded it.
What happened to him now or hereafter mattered so little, now that he
knew that she loved him with that strength which moveth mountains.

But to the vast company assembled here, all that my Lord of Rochester
said mattered a great deal, for it was a confirmation of inward
convictions. It gave sympathy free rein, having crowned it with
justification.

Even Sir William Jones felt that the prosecution had completely broken
down beneath the weight of my Lord of Rochester's evidence. He meant
to demand further corroboration, seeing that Sir John Ayloffe was
in court; but it would be an uphill fight now, against what was too
obvious justice to be wilfully set aside.

But he did ask my Lord of Rochester why he had delayed in coming
forward until well-nigh it had been too late.

"I was ready to come forward at any time," was Rochester's simple
reply; "had the prisoner called me, I would have told the truth at
once. But among gentlemen, sir, there is an unspoken compact, guessed
at by those who understand one another as gentlemen should. That the
accused did not desire mine evidence I readily saw. Only when a noble
lady came forward in sublime sacrifice and I feared that this--great
as it was--might prove purposeless, then did I feel in honour bound to
corroborate her testimony and to prove her true, whilst placing at her
feet the expression of my most humble respect."

To have doubted my Lord of Rochester's testimony had been madness in
the face of public feeling as well as of justice. No one would ever
attempt to suggest that his lordship was either a Papist or biassed
in favour of Roman Catholicism. Moreover, Sir John Ayloffe, also an
unimpeachably honourable gentleman, was there to add his word to that
of his friend. Sir William Jones having called him, asked him but a few
questions.

What could Cousin John do, but swear to the truth? Believe me that had
he found the slightest loophole whereby he could even now arrange a
happy marriage between his fair cousin and any earl of Stowmaries who
happened to be bearing the title at the time, he would have done it,
and earned that £12,000 which now certainly seemed hopelessly beyond
his grasp.

But he could find no loophole, nor could he attempt to deny the truth
of what Lord Rochester had said.

By the time Sir John Ayloffe had given what evidence was asked of him,
the spectators were loudly clamouring for the verdict.

"Not guilty! Not guilty!" came in excited shouts from the furthermost
corners of the great hall.

Of a truth had the informers been recalled they could not have escaped
with their lives, and as a measure of precaution the Lord Chief
Justice, before he began his summing up, did, we know, order the
removal of Pye and Oates through a back door and unbeknown to the
crowd. Oates' villainies did, unfortunately, rise triumphant from out
the ashes of this his first signal defeat in his campaign of perjuries.
As for Pye, he passed through that back door out of ken. I believe that
his name doth occur on several of the lists of witnesses brought up
against the unfortunate Papists during the whole feverish period of the
Popish plots, so we may assume that he continued his career of informer
with some benefit to himself.

But in Westminster Hall to-day the verdict was a foregone conclusion.
Even whilst the Lord Chief Justice summed up--as he did, we are
told, most eloquently and entirely in favour of the accused--he was
frequently interrupted by cries of: "Not guilty! Not guilty! The
verdict!"

When the verdict was pronounced, with absolute unanimity by the jury
in whose hands lay the life that had been so nobly fought for, it was
received with acclamation.

Men and women cheered to the echoes, whilst many voices shouted: "God
save Your Majesty!" There was a general rush for the centre of the
Hall, there where that small group of three still stood isolated. The
musketeers had grave difficulty in keeping any order.

In the midst of all this turmoil no one noticed that from the dark
corner beneath the mullioned window there rose the figure of a young
man dressed in rough clothes of sad-coloured cloth, whose pale face was
almost distorted by lines of passionate anger.

He drew a mask over his face and made his way through the excited
crowd. Under cover of the confusion, the rushing to and fro, the
cheering for the acquitted and the king, he quietly passed out of
sight.




                             CHAPTER XLIX

               Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,
               Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,
               A great-sized monster of ingratitudes.
                                     --TROILUS & CRESSIDA III. 3.


That same evening in the small house in the parish of Soho, Michael sat
beside an old woman whose wrinkled, toil-worn hand he held tenderly in
his own.

Life had dealt hardly with her, unaccustomed toil and a rough life had
done their work. Her sensibilities were blunted, almost extinct save
one--her love for her son.

Obediently she had left her Kentish village, her miserable cottage, and
ungrateful garden, to come to London when first he bade her so to do.
She had exchanged her rough worsted kirtle for a gown of black silk,
soft and pliable to the touch. This she had done to please Michael, not
because she cared. It was many, many years since last she had cared.

Humbly acceding to his wish she had lived in the house in Soho Square,
allowing herself to be tended by servants, she who awhile ago had
been scrubbing her own floors. To please him she had accepted all the
comforts, all the luxuries which he gave her. As for herself she had no
need of them.

Then when he went away and she was all alone in the big house, save
for the army of mute and obedient servants round her, she had wept not
a little because she did not see her son. She knew not whither he had
gone, and when she asked any of the servants they gave no definite
answer, only seemed more mute, more obedient than before.

But she did not complain. Michael was oft wont to go away like this, to
the wars mayhap; soon he would return all in good time and she would
see him again. Not the faintest echo from the great world outside
reached the lonely house in Soho Square; but then it had not reached
the Kentish village either, so old Mistress Kestyon was quite satisfied.

To-night Michael had returned. She was over-glad to see him. It seems
he had not been wounded in the wars, for which she was over-glad. He
would not let her out of his sight, even when a visitor came desiring
speech with him.

The visitor was Rupert Kestyon; the name hardly reached the feeble
intelligence, and the face conveyed no meaning. The old dame was quite
happy, however, for Michael sat beside her, holding her hand in his.
She did not understand much of what went on between the two men. They
were cousins, so Michael had said when first the young man entered and
he himself went forward to greet him and warmly took his hand.

"You see me shamed before you, Coz," he said gravely. "You know that
had I had the control of my fate, I should be watching you now from the
height or depth of another world--"

"You sent for me," said Rupert, in no way responding to the other's
cordiality. "I presume 'tis because you have something to say to me of
more importance than excuses for your happening to be alive."

"Nay! There is nothing more important than that just now, Coz,"
retorted the other quietly. "I sent for you because a chance of word
from your servant to mine revealed to me the fact that you were in
London. You came, no doubt, to see me hanged. A beautiful woman of whom
you, Coz, were never worthy, hath decided that I shall live."

The word that Rupert uttered in response brought an ugly frown on
Michael's brow.

"Cousin," he said sternly, "in your own interest I pray you cease this
wanton talk. I would have you know that I mean well by you."

He drew from out his pocket the paper that had the seal of His Holiness
the Pope attached to it and handed it to Rupert, who with a savage oath
took it from him.

"Here, Coz," he said, "is the papal dispensation which good M. Legros
gave into my hands when I parted from him at Westminster Hall. The
civil law of England will not take long in setting you free. What money
can accomplish, that it shall do to expedite your case. My word on it!
The lady will not defend it and the nullity of your marriage shall be
pronounced ere the first bud appears on the chestnut trees."

"A free man and yet a beggar," murmured Rupert moodily.

"Nay, nay, Cousin, why should you look on me as your enemy? Have I ever
acted as such? My mother, alas, is here as a proof that you and yours
were enemies to me, but I, not to you, 'pon my honour. I have no need
of great riches. The hundred and twenty thousand pounds with which you
gambled a year ago are yours, Cousin. Let us call them a loan which you
made me, and wherewith Fate hath worked its will for us. I give them
to you freely and with all my heart. You are not a beggar, you see,
and are free to marry whom you choose. You are still the cousin of, if
not the actual Earl of Stowmaries; many a pretty woman with taste and
ambition will--an I mistake not--smile on you. Life is full of joys yet
for you, Cousin, and Mistress Peyton will relent."

While he thus spoke lightly, almost gaily, the frown of moodiness fled
from Rupert Kestyon's brow. He could not help but be gratified at his
cousin's generosity, even though his heart no longer turned toward the
faithless beauty whose callousness had killed in him all love for her.
But there were plenty of pretty women yet in England, thank God, and a
man well-born and well-connected could cut a very fine figure in London
society these days on one hundred and twenty thousand pounds. In the
far-off days in old Virginia he had been quite glad of as many pence.

He was quite manly enough to thank his cousin warmly. But before he
went, he told Michael the news that had been all over London for some
day before the trial, namely, that beautiful Mistress Peyton had
finally decided to bestow her hand and fortune and her heart--on John
Ayloffe.

Good Cousin John! Confronted with beggary and the irretrievable loss
of that £12,000, he had bethought himself of the only plan whereby the
latter goodly sum could, after all, find its way into his own pocket.

The money with the lady was his only chance, and we are told that he
took it boldly, even contriving not to make too wry a face when the
capricious beauty--realising that Cousin John was her only hope of
matrimony now that her name had been so plentifully bespattered with
ridicule--decided to bestow her £20,000, her house and her person, on
the one man who would accept.

Cousin John became exceedingly fat after his marriage, for he led a
life of ease and comfort even though his former merry haunts knew him
no more.




                               CHAPTER L

                 And o'er the hills and far away,
                 Beyond their utmost purple rim,
                 Beyond the night, across the day,
                 Thro' all the world she followed him.
                                                      --TENNYSON.


Michael did not see Rose Marie in England, for her father had taken her
away that same evening, after the acquittal, and journeyed with her
forthwith to Paris.

And it was in the little room of the Rue de l'Ancienne Comédie that
Michael once more beheld his snowdrop. It was December now and the room
was filled with Christmas roses. Outside, the snow lay heavy on the
ground. Maman Legros, with sleeves well rolled up over her sturdy arms,
was stirring the contents of her stock-pot. Papa--a little more grey,
a little more bent, mayhap, than he had been a year ago--was staring
silently into the fire.

Rose Marie sat at her harpsichord in the window embrasure, and sang
to her own accompaniment. Through the panes of the leaded window the
pale rays of a December sun lit up the golden radiance of her hair, and
rested on her hands as they wandered over the ivory keys.

Thus Michael saw her again after all these months of suffering. He
stood for a moment in the doorway, for happiness at times is more
difficult to bear than grief. But Love was triumphant at last. The
splendid blackguard, the reckless adventurer, was only an humble lover
now. He gazed on his snowdrop with eyes wherein ardent passion mingled
with deep reverence.

Let the veil of oblivion be drawn across those leaded windows; let it
shut out all light which comes from the outer world. Michael at Rose
Marie's feet forgot all save that he had won her--the pure, stainless
girl--even through the infinity of her pity which had first called into
being her infinite love.

Papa and Maman Legros, looking on their child's exquisite face,
suffused now with the glow of perfect love and perfect trust, exchanged
a knowing look.

Then they very softly tiptoed out of the room.


                                THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Noble Rogue, by Baroness Emmuska Orczy Orczy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NOBLE ROGUE ***

***** This file should be named 60253-8.txt or 60253-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/2/5/60253/

Produced by Carlos Colon, the Harvard University and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
